<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Chronology</title>
      <link href="css/xml2epub.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000005348694" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <h1>Chronology</h1>
      
      
      <h2 id="imark_B08.0">Ottoman Period</h2>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.1"><b>1261–1310</b>   Foundation of <i>ghazi</i> principalities, including that of Ottoman.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.2"><b>1326</b>   Ottoman conquest of Bursa.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.3"><b>1327</b>   First Ottoman silver coin [<i>akçe</i>] printed in Bursa.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.4"><b>1352</b>   Orhan grants capitulations to the Genoese.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.5"><b>1361</b>   Murat I conquers Adrianople (Edirne).
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.6"><b>1385</b>   Ottoman conquest of Sofia.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.7"><b>1389</b>   Battle of Kosovo fought; Ottomans emerge victorious, but Murat I is slain.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.8"><b>1394</b>–<b>1402</b>   Ottoman blockade of Constantinople.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.9"><b>1402</b>   Battle of Ankara waged; Timur captures Bayezit I.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.10"><b>1413</b>   Mehmet I unifies Ottoman territories.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.11"><b>1424</b>   Peace treaty signed between Ottomans and Byzantines.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.12"><b>1453</b>   Siege of Constantinople; fall of Pera.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.13"><b>1460</b>   Conquest of the Morea.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.14"><b>1475</b>   Ottoman suzerainty over the khanate of the Crimea.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.15"><b>1475</b>   Battle of Çaldıran fought; Selim I defeats Shah Ismail.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.16"><b>1516</b>–<b>1517</b>   Syria and Egypt taken.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.17"><b>1521</b>   Belgrade falls.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.18"><b>1595</b>–<b>1610</b>   Celali revolts.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.19"><b>1669</b>   Crete falls.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.20"><b>1683</b>   Second siege of Vienna.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.21"><b>1699</b>   Treaty of Karlowitz signed.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.22"><b>1711</b>   Peter the Great defeated.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.23"><b>1715</b>   Morea retaken.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.24"><b>1718</b>–<b>1730</b>   Tulip Period.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.25"><b>1736</b>–<b>1739</b>   Belgrade retaken.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.26"><b>1765</b>–<b>1774</b>   War with Russian Federation fought.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.27"><b>1774</b>   Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca signed.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.28"><b>1789</b>–<b>1807 </b>Era of reforms initiated by Selim III.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.29"><b>1826</b>   Greece proclaims independence.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.30"><b>1839</b>   Gülhane Imperial Rescript; beginning of the Tanzimat (Reform) period.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.31"><b>1854</b>–<b>1856 </b>Crimean War waged.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.32"><b>1856</b>   Reform Edict proclaimed.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.33"><b>1858</b>   Land Code enacted.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.34"><b>1859</b>   Ambassador sent to United States.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.35"><b>1867</b>   First Ottoman sultan (Abdülaziz) visits Europe.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.36"><b>1876</b>   Proclamation of the First Constitutional Period.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.37"><b>1878</b>   Parliament prorogued indefinitely.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.38"><b>1900</b>   Istanbul University opens.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.39"><b>1908</b>   Second Constitutional Period begins. Liberal Union formed.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.40"><b>1909</b>   Abdülhamit II deposed.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.41"><b>1911</b>   Freedom and Accord Party established.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.42"><b>1912</b>–<b>1913 </b>First Balkan War fought.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.43"><b>1913</b>   Committee for Union and Progress in power. Second Balkan War fought.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.44"><b>1914</b> Ottomans enter World War I on the side of the Axis powers.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.45"><b>1918</b> Mudros Armistice signed.
      </p>
      
      <h2 id="imark_B08.46">War of Independence and Its Aftermath</h2>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.47"><b>1919</b>   <b>19 May: </b>Mustafa Kemal lands in Samsun to start the national liberation movement. <b>22 </b> <b>June: </b>Amasya Circular Letter circulated. <b>23 July–7 August: </b>Erzurum Congress convened. <b>4–11 September: </b>Sivas Congress in place.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.48"><b>1920</b>   <b>19 February: </b>National Pact signed. <b>16 March: </b>Istanbul falls under Allied military control. <b>23 April: </b>Grand National Assembly convenes. <b>22 June: </b>Greek army advances against Nationalists. <b>10 August: </b>Treaty of Sèvres signed, parceling Turkey among the Allied powers.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.49"><b>1921</b>   <b>20 January: </b>Constitutional Act enacted. <b>16 March: </b>Treaty of Moscow signed with Soviet Union.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.50"><b>1922</b>   <b>30 August: </b>Decisive victory won over invading Greek forces. <b>11 October: </b>Mudanya Armistice signed. <b>1 November: </b>Sultanate abolished.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.51"><b>1923</b>   <b>17 February: </b>İzmir Economic Congress convened. <b>24 July: </b>Lausanne Treaty essentially determines Turkey’s present boundaries. <b>9 August: </b>People’s Party founded, to become the Republican People’s Party on 10 November 1924.
         <b>23 October: </b>Ankara becomes capital city.
      </p>
      
      <h2 id="imark_B08.52">The First Republic of Turkey</h2>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.53"><b>1923</b>   <b>29 October: </b>Republic of Turkey proclaimed.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.54"><b>1924</b>   <b>3 March: </b>Caliphate abolished. <b>8 April: </b>Religious courts abolished. <b>26 August: </b>İş-Bank founded. <b>17 November: </b>Progressive Republican Party formed.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.55"><b>1925</b>   <b>11 February–29 June: </b>First Kurdish insurrection. <b>5 June: </b>Progressive Republican Party dissolved by the government. <b>30 September: </b>Religious orders suppressed. <b>25 November: </b>Wearing of the fez forbidden by law. <b>26 December: </b>International calendar and international system of time adopted.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.56"><b>1926</b>   <b>17 February: </b>New civil code (based on the Swiss code) adopted, effective 4 October. <b>1 March: </b>New criminal code (based on the Italian code) adopted, effective 1 July. <b>5 June: </b>Anglo-Turkish Treaty signed. <b>28 June: </b>New commercial code (primarily based on the German code) adopted.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.57"><b>1927</b>   <b>7 March: </b>Kurdish revolt under Sheikh Said breaks out; intermittent insurrections brought under
         virtually complete control in 1938.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.58"><b>1928</b>   <b>10 April: </b>State declared secular. <b>3 November: </b>Latin alphabet adopted, effective 1 December 1928.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.59"><b>1929</b>   <b>17 June: </b>Suppression of communist propaganda in Turkey.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.60"><b>1930</b>   <b>16 April: </b>Women are given the right to vote in municipal elections. <b>12 August: </b>Republican Free Party formed. <b>17 November: </b>Republican Free Party dissolves.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.61"><b>1931</b>   <b>20 April: </b>Republican People’s Party declared republican, nationalist, populist, statist, secular,
         and revolutionary-reformist.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.62"><b>1932</b>   <b>19 February: </b>People’s Houses opened. <b>12 August: </b>Turkey joins League of Nations.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.63"><b>1934</b>   <b>9 February: </b>Balkan Pact reached with Greece, Romania, and Yugoslavia. <b>21 June: </b>Law requiring all citizens to adopt family names adopted, effective 1 January 1935.
         <b>26 November: </b>Mustafa Kemal bestowed family name of “Atatürk” (Father of Turks) by National Assembly.
         <b>8 December: </b>Women eligible to vote in national elections and become members of the National Assembly.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.64"><b>1935</b>   <b>27 May: </b>Sunday, rather than Friday, becomes the day of rest.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.65"><b>1936</b>   <b>20 July: </b>Montreux Convention signed.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.66"><b>1937</b>   <b>9 July: </b>Sâdabad Pact reached with Iraq, Iran, and Afghanistan.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.67"><b>1938</b>   <b>10 November: </b>Atatürk dies. <b>11 November: </b>İsmet İnönü becomes president of republic.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.68"><b>1939</b>   <b>29 June: </b>Alexandretta (Hatay) Assembly votes for union with Turkey. <b>19 October: </b>Ankara Pact signed with Great Britain and France.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.69"><b>1941</b>   <b>18 June: </b>German-Turkish Friendship and Nonaggression Pact signed.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.70"><b>1942</b>   <b>11 November: </b>Wealth tax enacted.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.71"><b>1943</b>   <b>4–6 December: </b>Cairo Conference held; Winston Churchill, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and İsmet İnönü participate.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.72"><b>1945</b>   <b>24 February: </b>Turkey signs United Nations Charter, ratified by National Assembly on 15 August. <b>7 June: </b>Soviet ultimatum given; Turkey rejects territorial demands.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.73"><b>1946</b>   <b>7 January: </b>Democratic Party founded. <b>31 May: </b>New electoral law enacted providing for direct and secret ballot.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.74"><b>1947</b>   <b>12 March: </b>President Harry S. Truman announces program of U.S. aid to Greece and Turkey. <b>12 July: </b>İsmet İnönü’s declaration paves the way for an unhampered opposition and, eventually,
         multiparty politics.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.75"><b>1948</b>   <b>20 July: </b>Nation Party founded.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.76"><b>1949</b>   <b>24 March: </b>Turkey grants de facto recognition to Israel. <b>8 August: </b>Turkey admitted to Council of Europe.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.77"><b>1950</b>   <b>16 February: </b>Judiciary given responsibility for the administration of electoral law. <b>14 May: </b>Democratic Party wins general elections; end of 27-year-old Republican People’s Party
         rule. <b>4 July: </b>Israel and Turkey sign trade agreement. <b>25 July: </b>Turkey sends troops to Korean War.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.78"><b>1952</b>   <b>18 February: </b>Turkey and Greece become full-fledged members in North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.79"><b>1953</b>   <b>25 February: </b>Nonaggression and Friendship Pact signed with Greece and Yugoslavia.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.80"><b>1954</b>   <b>27 January: </b>Nation Party dissolved by court order on grounds that it seeks to use religion for
         political purposes. <b>2 February: </b>Republican Nation Party founded as successor to Nation Party. <b>2 April: </b>Treaty of Mutual Friendship signed with Pakistan. <b>9 August: </b>Balkan Pact endorsed with Greece and Yugoslavia.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.81"><b>1955</b>   <b>24 February: </b>Baghdad Pact signed with Iraq, becoming operative 15 April, joined by Great Britain
         on 4 April, Pakistan on 23 September, and Iran on 11 October. <b>6 September: </b>Anti-Greek rioting in Istanbul, İzmir, and Ankara. <b>20 December: </b>Freedom Party established by dissidents in Democratic Party.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.82"><b>1956</b>   <b>6 June: </b>Press Law amended, increasing the government’s powers over the press. <b>27 June: </b>Law limiting the holding of public political meetings enacted. <b>26 November: </b>Turkey withdraws its ambassador to Israel until Israel is willing to resolve its differences
         with the Arabs.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.83"><b>1957</b>   <b>15 January: </b>In U.S.-Turkish agreement, Turkey guaranteed convertibility and transfer of capital
         and earnings of approved U.S. private investment in Turkey. <b>6 March: </b>Schools for preachers and prayer leaders given official status.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.84"><b>1958</b>   <b>16 January: </b>Nine army officers arrested for plotting against the government. <b>24 November: </b>Freedom Party dissolves to merge with Republican People’s Party.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.85"><b>1959</b>   <b>19 February: </b>Greece, Turkey, and Britain agree to establish an independent Cyprus Republic on a
         communal basis. <b>5 March: </b>Turkey and United States sign bilateral defense agreement, ratified by Turkey in May
         1959. <b>31 July: </b>Turkey applies for associate membership in European Economic Community.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.86"><b>1960</b>   <b>19 March: </b>Israel and Turkey sign trade and payments agreement. <b>18 April: </b>All party-political activity suspended for three months, pending an investigation
         of Republican People’s Party by a National Assembly commission. <b>28, 30 April–2, 14 May: </b>Student demonstrations held against government. <b>21 May: </b>Army War College cadets march in Ankara in support of antigovernment demonstrations.
         <b>27 May: </b>Officer coup seizes power; General Cemal Gürsel co-opted as its leader. <b>21 September: </b>Democratic Party (DP) abolished by court order. <b>14 October: </b>Leaders and parliamentarians of DP go on trial for unconstitutional acts and corruption.
         <b>13 November: </b>Gürsel dismisses 14 of the 37 members of National Unity Committee for their radical
         views.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.87"><b>1961</b>   <b>6 January: </b>Constituent Assembly convenes. <b>11 February: </b>Justice Party established, also New Turkey Party.
      </p>
      
      <h2 id="imark_B08.88">The Second Republic of Turkey</h2>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.89"><b>1961</b>   <b>9 July: </b>New constitution ratified in nationwide referendum. <b>15 September: </b>Celal Bayar (former president), Adnan Menderes (former prime minister), Fatin Rüştü
         Zorlu (former foreign minister), Hasan Polatkan (former finance minister), and 11
         other members of the Democratic Party sentenced to death. Sentences of Bayar and the
         11 are commuted to life imprisonment. Other death sentences are executed. <b>25 October: </b>New, two-house Grand National Assembly convenes.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.90"><b>1962</b>   <b>22 February: </b>Coup attempt led by Colonel Talat Aydemir fails. <b>26 August: </b>U.S. vice president Lyndon B. Johnson visits Turkey.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.91"><b>1963</b>   <b>21 May: </b>Another coup attempt by Aydemir and fellow officers is put down. <b>12 September: </b>Turkey becomes an associate member of European Economic Community. <b>25 December: </b>Turkish warplanes fly over Nicosia as warning against massacre of Turks on Cyprus.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.92"><b>1964</b>   <b>12 March: </b>Turkey warns Archbishop Makarios to stop Greek community’s atrocities toward the Turkish
         community on the island. <b>6 June: </b>U.S. president Lyndon B. Johnson dissuades the Turkish government from military intervention
         in Cyprus.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.93"><b>1965</b>   <b>3 December: </b>Soviet Union contributes to construction of Turkey’s third steel plant.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.94"><b>1966</b>   <b>14 January: </b>U.S. president Lyndon B. Johnson sends terse letter to İsmet İnönü, asking Turks not
         to launch a military operation in Cyprus. <b>31 January: </b>İnönü’s firm reply is issued to Johnson, while resentment against U.S. influence in
         Turkey grows. <b>8 July: </b>President Cevdet Sunay pardons Celal Bayar, former president of the republic.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.95"><b>1967</b>   <b>30 April: </b>Reliance Party formed.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.96"><b>1968</b>   <b>24 June: </b>Istanbul University closed until 15 July, following student unrest. <b>25–30 October: </b>French president Charles de Gaulle visits Turkey.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.97"><b>1969</b>   <b>6 January: </b>U.S. ambassador Robert Komer’s car burned by leftist students. <b>9 February: </b>Alparslan Türkeş elected chairman of newly established Nationalist Action Party. <b>3 May: </b>Extreme rightists disrupt funeral ceremony of the late president of High Court of
         Appeals. <b>31 May: </b>Istanbul University closed, following student siege.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.98"><b>1970</b>   <b>31 January: </b>Pro-Islamic National Order Party formed. <b>15–16 June: </b>Workers demonstrate in Istanbul and Kocaeli; martial law proclaimed. <b>22 July: </b>Turkey and European Community sign agreement after Ankara’s completion of the first
         phase of preparation for future membership. <b>18 December: </b>Ferruh Bozbeyli and 26 other Justice Party deputies expelled from their party; they
         form Democratic Party.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.99"><b>1971</b>   <b>20 January: </b>Middle East Technical University closed following student unrest. <b>3 March: </b>Four American noncommissioned officers are kidnapped and released five days later
         by urban leftist guerrillas. <b>12 March: </b>Chief of General Staff and commanders of three forces issue memorandum calling for
         strong government to fight anarchy and inflation and implement social reforms or face
         military intervention. Prime Minister Süleyman Demirel resigns. <b>7 April: </b>Nihat Erim’s above-party government formed at the behest of the military. <b>27 April: </b>Martial law declared and all student associations banned. <b>21 May: </b>Constitutional Court closes down National Order Party for antisecular propaganda.
         <b>20 July: </b>Constitutional Court closes down Labor Party of Turkey for making communist propaganda
         and encouraging separatist movements. <b>20 September: </b>Constitutional amendments adopted by Parliament. <b>12 October: </b>U.S. vice president Spiro Agnew visits Ankara. <b>18 October: </b>Queen Elizabeth II visits Turkey.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.100"><b>1972</b>   <b>10 January: </b>Military High Court of Appeals upholds death sentences against three members of Turkish
         People’s Liberation Army. <b>8 March: </b>Autonomy of Turkish Radio and TV curtailed. <b>4 May: </b>General Kemalettin Eken, head of the gendarmerie, wounded by young terrorists. <b>6 May: </b>Three members of Turkish People’s Liberation Army given death sentences by Military
         High Court of Appeals executed. <b>8 May: </b>İsmet İnönü, chairman of Republican People’s Party (RPP), resigns after defeat of
         his followers at RPP convention. <b>14 May: </b>Bülent Ecevit becomes chairman of RPP, succeeding İsmet İnönü, who was chairman for
         34 years. <b>4 September: </b>Republican Party formed. <b>5 December: </b>First Turkish ambassador to Peking (now Beijing) presents his credentials.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.101"><b>1973</b>   <b>3 March: </b>Republican Party unites with Reliance Party to become Republican Reliance Party. <b>6 April: </b>Senator and retired admiral Fahri Korutürk elected president of the republic. <b>31 June: </b>Turkey and European Community sign supplementary protocol regulating Turkey’s associate
         membership. <b>26 October: </b>Turkey and Soviet Union sign agreement to collaborate on construction of a jointly
         built dam in Turkey. <b>25 December: </b>İsmet İnönü dies.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.102"><b>1974</b>   <b>22 April: </b>Law that restores political rights of former Democratic Party members goes into force.
         <b>22 June: </b>Socialist Labor Party of Turkey formed. <b>15 July: </b>Athens-led Cypriot Army takes over government on Cyprus. <b>20 July: </b>Turkish armed forces intervene to restore peace and stability on Cyprus. <b>31 July: </b>Turkey, Greece, and Britain sign cease-fire accord on Cyprus. <b>14 August: </b>Turkish forces in Cyprus hit east and west of Nicosia, the capital, and enter Famagusta
         as Geneva peace talks fail. <b>15 October: </b>U.S. president Gerald Ford postpones enactment of a bill to cut military aid to Turkey.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.103"><b>1975</b>   <b>6 February: </b>Turkey suspends talks on the implementation of bilateral accords with United States.
         <b>13 February: </b>Turkish Federated State of Cyprus proclaimed. <b>31 March: </b>Six-month-old government crisis ends as Prime Minister Süleyman Demirel announces
         “nationalist front” government of Justice Party, Nationalist Action Party, National
         Salvation Party, and Republican Reliance Party. <b>26 July: </b>Activities at U.S. military bases in Turkey suspended; Turkish army set to take over
         full control of bases. <b>3 October: </b>U.S. House of Representatives votes to partially lift arms embargo on Turkey. <b>25 December: </b>Soviet premier Aleksey Kosygin visits Ankara.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.104"><b>1976</b>   <b>28 March: </b>Turkey and United States sign new military accord restoring U.S. privileges at defense
         facilities in Turkey. <b>12 May: </b>Seventh Islamic Conference opens in Istanbul. <b>9 August: </b>Ankara sends tough reply to Greece’s note claiming Turkey violated Aegean continental
         shelf with Seismic I research. <b>17 September: </b>Tens of thousands of leftist Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions member-workers
         strike to protest government efforts to extend life span of State Security Courts.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.105"><b>1977</b>   <b>3 January: </b>Kirkuk-Iskenderun pipeline inaugurated. <b>1 May: </b>Thirty-seven dead in May Day rally in Istanbul. <b>14 August: </b>Turkey claims Greece violated international treaties by militarizing Aegean islands.
         <b>30 August: </b>In Great Victory Day message, President Fahri Korutürk says, “Keep army out of politics.”
         <b>6 October: </b>Türk-İş (largest labor confederation in Turkey) presents memorandum to government,
         Parliament, and political parties and demands reforms and threatens general strike.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.106"><b>1978</b>   <b>30 January: </b>Rightist youth stage illegal demonstration in Ankara. <b>17 March: </b>Turkey strongly criticizes Israeli invasion of Lebanon. <b>31 May: </b>Prime Minister Ecevit meets U.S. president Jimmy Carter. <b>10 June: </b>Chief of General Staff General Kenan Evren reacts to wave of violence engulfing Turkey,
         saying the armed forces will not allow anyone to divide the country. <b>23 June: </b>Turkey and Soviet Union sign “political document.” <b>11 July: </b>Gunmen kill Professor Bedrettin Cömert of Hacettepe University in an ambush. <b>27 September: </b>United States formally lifts embargo on aid to Turkey. <b>24 December: </b>Sectarian clashes in Kahramanmaraş in southeastern Turkey leave 117 dead and more
         than 1,000 wounded.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.107"><b>1979</b>   <b>8 March: </b>President Fahri Korutürk once more warns political leaders, “Keep armed forces out
         of your conflict.” <b>29 March: </b>U.S. Congress approves $200 million in military aid to Turkey. <b>12 April: </b>One U.S. serviceman killed and another seriously wounded by gunmen in İzmir. <b>4 May: </b>U.S. Senate turns down $50 million aid grant proposal to Turkey. <b>11 May: </b>Gunmen kill one U.S. serviceman and injure another; outlawed Marxist-Leninist Armed
         Propaganda Union claims responsibility. <b>22 May: </b>U.S. Senate approves $50 million grant to Turkey. <b>15 June: </b>Turkish and Greek officials open intercommunal talks on Cyprus. <b>23 June: </b>Turkey cannot permit U-2 flights over its airspace under present circumstances, says
         chief of General Staff General Evren. <b>8 August: </b>Some students at the opening ceremony of Middle East Technical University refuse to
         stand to attention and force others to sit down when the Turkish national anthem is
         sung. Instead, they sing the communist “International” and take the oath of revolution.
         <b>5 October: </b>Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) chief Yasser Arafat inaugurates permanent
         PLO office in Ankara. <b>9 October: </b>Government extends (temporary) status of U.S. bases in Turkey. <b>20 November: </b>Professor Ümit Doğanay, deputy dean of Istanbul University’s political sciences faculty,
         is assassinated by terrorists.
      </p>
      
      <h2 id="imark_B08.108">The Third Republic of Turkey</h2>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.109"><b>1980</b>   <b>2 January: </b>Letter of warning by the chief of General Staff and other top army generals calling
         for urgent action by all “constitutional institutions” and political parties against
         terrorism is handed over by President Fahri Korutürk to ruling Justice Party leader
         Süleyman Demirel and opposition Republican People’s Party chairman Bülent Ecevit.
         <b>2 February: </b>Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions takes general strike decision against
         government’s economic measures, which it calls “fascist pressure on labor.” <b>22 February: </b>Turkey unilaterally opens Aegean airspace to air traffic. <b>28 February: </b>Martial law commander General Nevzat Bölügiray says there is “an undeclared civil
         war in Turkey.” <b>18 April: </b>Turkey signs nuclear nonproliferation accord. <b>8 May: </b>Labor Party of Turkey closed down by the Constitutional Court. <b>13 May: </b>General Evren urges political parties to elect a new president without delay. <b>26 May: </b>General Kenan Evren says Turkish armed forces will continue to follow the path drawn
         by Atatürk. <b>1 July: </b>Turkey and European Community conclude a new association agreement. <b>9 July: </b>Police forces reported ineffective in Fatsa township, which is under control of extreme
         leftist factions and “people’s committees.” <b>19 July: </b>Former premier Nihat Erim assassinated by four terrorists in Istanbul. <b>30 August: </b>Angered by National Salvation Party (NSP) chief Necmettin Erbakan’s absence at the
         Victory Day celebrations, General Evren asks, “Is he against the August 30 victory?”
         (30 August 1922 was the date of decisive victory over invading Greek forces). <b>6 September: </b>Group of fanatics refuses to sing national anthem in NSP rally in Konya. <b>12 September: </b>Turkish armed forces, headed by General Evren, take over the administration. <b>16 September: </b>Head of state, General Evren, holds his first press conference and says, “Our aim
         is to protect and safeguard democracy.” <b>11 October: </b>Ankara military court arrests Nationalist Action Party leader Alparslan Türkeş and
         36 party members for “instigating civil war.” <b>15 October</b> <b>:</b> NSP chairman Erbakan and 21 party members arrested for acting against secular principles
         of the republic. <b>27 October: </b>Provisional constitution announced; 1961 constitution to remain in force until a new
         constitution is drafted. <b>2 December: </b>Turkey downgrades relations with Israel to minimum. <b>4 December: </b>Turkey signs $200 million aid agreement with United States.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.110"><b>1981</b>   <b>23 January: </b>Premier Bülend Ulusu attends Islamic summit in Jidda, Saudi Arabia. <b>14 February: </b>National Security Council (NSC) reminds nation that all political activities have
         been banned in the country. <b>15 June: </b>Syria and Turkey sign juridical agreement. <b>1 October: </b>Political Affairs Committee of Council of Europe recommends continuation of Turkish
         membership. <b>16 October: </b>NSC dissolves all political parties. <b>23 October: </b>Consultative Assembly inaugurated. Head of state Kenan Evren outlines the task of
         new assembly—to reinstate democracy. <b>3 November: </b>Martial law court sentences Bülent Ecevit to four months in prison for engaging in
         political activity.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.111"><b>1982</b>   <b>8 April: </b>Turco-Romanian Economic Cooperation protocol signed. <b>10 April: </b>Bülent Ecevit in custody for article he wrote in a Norwegian paper. <b>26 April: </b>Second arrest order for Ecevit for letter he allegedly wrote to a Dutch journalist,
         later broadcast by BBC. <b>2 June: </b>Ecevit is acquitted of all charges relating to newspaper article. <b>23 July: </b>Moratorium announced between Greece and Turkey, which calls on the two countries to
         refrain from provocative acts and statements. <b>4 August: </b>NSC lifts restrictions on expression of political views; ban on political comments
         by former political leaders remains in force.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.112"><b>1982</b>   <b>7 November: </b>National referendum on draft constitution held; 91 percent of those who voted (also
         91 percent) approve new constitution; together with the constitutional referendum,
         General Kenan Evren is elected Turkey’s president. <b>16 November: </b>Prime Minister Bülend Ulusu meets Soviet prime minister Nikolai Tikhonov in Moscow.
         <b>29 November: </b>Turkey and United States to sign a memorandum of understanding for modernization of
         more than 10 airfields in Turkey. <b>15 December:</b> People’s Republic of China and Turkey sign accord stipulating increase in economic
         cooperation.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.113"><b>1983</b>   <b>28 January: </b>Parliamentary Assembly of Council of Europe votes to give “serious consideration”
         to Turkey’s expulsion from the council because of alleged human rights violations.
         <b>24 February: </b>Ankara martial law court sentences Necmettin Erbakan to four years in prison for attempting
         to establish state based on Islam. <b>24 April: </b>Ban on political activities lifted. <b>4 May: </b>Ankara martial law court sentences defunct Workers and Peasants Party of Turkey chairman
         Doğu Perinçek to 12 years’ imprisonment. <b>16 May: </b>Nationalist Democracy Party becomes first political party to be set up following 12
         September 1980 military takeover. <b>19 May: </b>Populist Party formed. <b>20 May: </b>Turgut Özal forms Motherland Party (MP). Grand Turkey Party is established by those
         close to the defunct Justice Party (JP). <b>29 May: </b>Professor Erdal İnönü (son of late İsmet İnönü) announces establishment of Social
         Democracy Party (SDP). <b>31 May: </b>Military administration closes down Grand Turkey Party, claiming it is a continuation
         of the defunct JP. <b>23 June: </b>True Path Party (TPP), filling the vacuum created by the closure of the Grand Turkey
         Party, is established. Military administration vetoes top brass of Social Democracy
         Party, including its chairman, Erdal İnönü. <b>7 July: </b>National Security Council vetoes 30 founders of True Path Party. <b>24 August: </b>NSC gives approval to participation of Motherland Party in 6 November elections. The
         council does not approve the list of founding members of SDP and TPP, thus disqualifying
         them from taking part in the elections. <b>6 November: </b>MP wins elections by majority. <b>15 November: </b>Turkish Cypriots announce establishment of Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC);
         Turkey recognizes new state. <b>29 December: </b>Prime Minister Turgut Özal unveils package of radical economic measures liberalizing
         imports and taking steps toward full convertibility of Turkish lira.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.114"><b>1984</b>   <b>13 March: </b>President Li Xiannian arrives in Ankara to become first Chinese head of state to visit
         Turkey. <b>2 May: </b>Turkey and West Germany sign cooperation agreement for peaceful use of nuclear energy.
         <b>13 November: </b>Permanent Economic Committee of the Organization of Islamic Conference opens three
         days of meetings with an inaugural speech by President Kenan Evren, the committee’s
         chairman. <b>25 December: </b>Soviet premier Nikolai Tikhonov arrives in Ankara for official visit.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.115"><b>1985</b>   <b>13 February: </b>Martial law tribunal acquits leaders of defunct National Salvation Party of charges
         of attempting to set up state based on Islam. <b>2 April: </b>Prime Minister Turgut Özal meets U.S. president Ronald Reagan. <b>9 July: </b>Helmut Kohl, chancellor of Federal Republic of Germany, arrives in Turkey for official
         visit. <b>3 November: </b>Populist Party and Social Democracy Party merge to form Social Democratic Populist
         Party. <b>14 November: </b>Democratic Left Party founded by Rahşan Ecevit (wife of Bülent Ecevit).
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.116"><b>1986</b>   <b>4 May: </b>Opposition Nationalist Democracy Party (NDP) extraordinary convention dissolves the
         party. <b>9 May: </b>Former Turkish Union of Chambers president Mehmet Yazar establishes Free Democratic
         Party, along with 22 former NDP deputies. <b>16 May: </b>True Path Party forms parliamentary group after 20 former independent deputies join
         the party. <b>18 May: </b>Former prime minister Bülent Ecevit returns to political scene. <b>30 May: </b>Erdal İnönü elected new chairman of Social Democratic Populist Party (SDPP). <b>15 August: </b>Turkish warplanes bomb separatist rebel hideouts in northern Iraq four days after
         12 Turkish soldiers are killed near the border. <b>24 October: </b>Prime Minister Turgut Özal breaks ground for 847-kilometer pipeline that will bring
         Soviet natural gas to Turkey. <b>30 November: </b>Free Democratic Party dissolves after by-election defeat. <b>19 December: </b>Greek and Turkish soldiers clash at border. <b>26 December: </b>People’s Party established by 20 former SDPP deputies. <b>29 December: </b>People’s Party dissolves itself; 19 of its deputies join Democratic Left Party.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.117"><b>1987</b>   <b>8 January: </b>President Kenan Evren in speech says Muslim fundamentalism has been resurrected in
         Turkey and calls on state officials and people to struggle against all kinds of extremism.
         <b>10 January: </b>Former prime minister Bülent Ecevit sentenced to prison term of 11 months for speech
         made during September 1986 election campaign in which he allegedly violated a political
         ban against former political leaders. <b>25 January: </b>President Evren flies to Kuwait to attend two-day summit of heads of Islamic countries.
         <b>26 January: </b>Turkey recognizes individual rights of Turkish citizens to apply to European Human
         Rights Commission. <b>4 March: </b>Turkish jet fighters bomb separatist rebel camps and ammunition depots in northern
         Iraq in retaliation for separatist killings of civilians in Turkey. <b>16 March: </b>Turkey and United States extend 1980 Turkish-American Defense and Economic Cooperation
         Agreement until 18 December 1990. <b>26 March: </b>Turkey counters Greek decision to explore for oil in disputed areas of Aegean Sea.
         <b>27 March: </b>Turkish armed forces are placed in state of readiness as tensions mount between Greece
         and Turkey. <b>28 March: </b>Turkey receives assurances from Greece that it will not explore for oil in disputed
         waters of Aegean Sea. <b>7 April: </b>Former Nationalist Action Party chairman Alparslan Türkeş sentenced to prison term
         of 11 years; party leadership accused of plotting ultranationalist armed revolt in
         the country. <b>14 April: </b>Turkey applies to European Community for full membership. <b>29 June: </b>Prime Minister Turgut Özal announces that General Necip Torumtay will become Turkey’s
         chief of General Staff rather than General Necdet Öztorun, widely believed to be the
         army’s choice. <b>14 July: </b>Government establishes office of emergency rule regional governor to coordinate fight
         against terrorism in eight eastern and southeastern provinces. <b>6 September: </b>National referendum lifts bans against political leaders who ruled the country before
         the 1980 military intervention, with a razor-thin majority. <b>13 September: </b>Bülent Ecevit becomes chairman of Democratic Left Party. <b>24 September: </b>Süleyman Demirel becomes chairman of True Path Party. <b>4 October: </b>Alparslan Türkeş becomes chairman of Nationalist Work Party. <b>11 October: </b>Necmettin Erbakan becomes chairman of Welfare Party. <b>29 November: </b>General elections held; Motherland Party retains majority of seats in Parliament.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.118"><b>1988</b>   <b>11 January: </b>Turkey signs Council of Europe’s Convention on Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or
         Degrading Treatment or Punishment. <b>25 January: </b>Turkey signs United Nations’ international convention against inhuman treatment and
         torture. <b>1 February: </b>Socialist Party founded. <b>6 April: </b>British prime minister Margaret Thatcher arrives for three-day official visit. <b>26 June: </b>President Kenan Evren begins five-day visit to United States. <b>12 July: </b>President Evren starts three-day visit to Great Britain. <b>11 October: </b>Government liberalizes bank interest rates. <b>16 October: </b>President Evren flies to Federal Republic of Germany for five-day official visit;
         he tells journalists that articles of Penal Code dealing with communism should be
         scrapped to open the way for the establishment of a Communist Party in Turkey. <b>3 December: </b>Council of Higher Education, the highest body of Turkish universities, lifts ban against
         Islamic-style head scarves for female university students. <b>8 December: </b>Constitutional Court rejects request by chief prosecutor to close down Socialist Party.
         <b>16 December: </b>Prime Minister Turgut Özal meets with U.S. president Ronald Reagan and President-Elect
         George H. W. Bush at White House.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.119"><b>1989</b>   <b>2 February: </b>Turkey and Iran sign agreement in Ankara, reviving a 52-year-old border security pact
         that aims to curb drug smuggling and rebel activity. <b>7 March: </b>Constitutional Court annuls law allowing female students to wear Islamic-style head
         scarves at universities. <b>11 April: </b>Labor unrest spreads throughout Turkey after government and trade union negotiators
         fail to agree on pay hike for 600,000 workers employed by the state. <b>13 April: </b>Konya municipality lifts its decision to segregate male and female students on buses
         after wide-scale student protests. <b>16 May: </b>Turkey grants United States permission to modernize Pirinçlik listening station near
         the southeastern city of Diyarbakır. <b>17 August: </b>In an unprecedented move, the armed forces issue statement declaring they “will do
         everything to combat separatist terrorism that aims at destroying the national existence
         and territorial integrity of the country,” following a sudden escalation in separatist
         incidents in southeastern Turkey. <b>17 September: </b>Central Bank announces it has completed payment of country’s rescheduled foreign debts,
         introduced 22 years earlier under the name of “Convertible Turkish Lira Accounts.”
         <b>31 October: </b>Parliament elects Prime Minister Turgut Özal as president. <b>17 November: </b>Yıldırım Akbulut elected chairman of Motherland Party. <b>29 November: </b>Turkey approves European Social Charter. <b>8 December: </b>After 60 years of illegality, the clandestine Turkish United Communist Party announces
         its decision to end its “illegal” status and establish a legal Communist Party in
         Turkey.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.120"><b>1990</b>   <b>31 January: </b>Professor Muammer Aksoy assassinated; two separate unknown Islamic fundamentalist
         groups claim responsibility for killing the ardently secularist professor. <b>4 February: </b>European Community foreign ministers agree to delay negotiations with Turkey on its
         full membership request; however, all members, with the exception of Greece, say they
         wish closer relations with Turkey. <b>5 April: </b>International Monetary Fund designates Turkish lira fully convertible currency. <b>1 May: </b>May Day turns sour as left-wing supporters try to stage mass rallies in Istanbul and
         clash with police; 1,100 taken into custody. <b>17 May: </b>Democratic Center Party of Bedrettin Dalan established. <b>4 June: </b>Turkish United Communist Party founded. <b>7 June: </b>Independent deputies who quit the main opposition Social Democratic Populist Party
         establish People’s Toiling Party. <b>2 August: </b>Turkey voices deep concern as Iraq invades Kuwait and asks Baghdad to restore Kuwaiti
         territorial integrity and sovereignty. <b>8 August: </b>Turkey joins United Nations Security Council sanctions against Iraq and closes down
         the twin pipeline carrying Iraqi crude oil exports to its Mediterranean terminal at
         Yumurtalık. <b>12 August: </b>Parliament gives government permission to send troops abroad and allows foreign forces
         to be stationed on Turkish soil only if Turkey is attacked. <b>5 September: </b>Parliament gives authority to the government to send Turkish troops abroad and allow
         foreign troops to be stationed in Turkey without restrictions. <b>18 September: </b>Defense and Economic Cooperation Agreement between Turkey and United States extended
         for another year. <b>23 September: </b>President Turgut Özal goes to United States to meet President George H. W. Bush. <b>6 October: </b>Professor Bahriye Üçok, known for her strong prosecular views, is killed in a parcel
         bomb attack. <b>19 November: </b>President Özal and Prime Minister Yıldırım Akbulut sign historic treaty that cuts
         conventional forces in Europe and ends Cold War. <b>3 December: </b>Chief of General Staff General Necip Torumtay resigns, saying the principles he believes
         in and his understanding of government render it impossible for him to continue in
         office. <b>5 December: </b>Parliament votes to establish Parliamentary Human Rights Commission. <b>19 December: </b>Government asks North Atlantic Treaty Organization to deploy Allied mobile forces
         in southeastern Turkey against possible Iraqi attack.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.121"><b>1991</b>   <b>17 January: </b>Parliament gives added war powers to the government, including permission for the
         United States to use Turkish air bases. <b>12 March: </b>Turkey and the Soviet Union sign Friendship and Cooperation Treaty. <b>23 March: </b>At joint White House press conference with U.S. president George H. W. Bush, President
         Turgut Özal says Turkey will not allow the creation of a Kurdish state in northern
         Iraq. <b>12 April: </b>Bill lifts ban on speaking in Kurdish. <b>13 May: </b>Unidentified terrorists fatally shoot retired lieutenant general İsmail Selen in Ankara
         and gendarmerie commander Brigadier General Temel Cingöz in Adana. <b>5 June: </b>President Özal says it is unthinkable that Turkey will shoulder its share of the military
         burden of European security while being left out of other areas in the “new Europe.”
         <b>6 July: </b>Turkey’s first female governor appointed to Muğla province. <b>20 July: </b>President Bush arrives in Turkey for two-day visit. <b>29 July: </b>Turkey forbids allied forces to launch future punitive air strikes against Iraq from
         Turkish air bases. <b>15 August: </b>In İzmir, police arrest at least 44 Kurdish rebels participating in celebrations of
         the seventh anniversary of the Kurdish separatist struggle in Turkey. <b>19 August: </b>British businessman Andrew Blake killed in Istanbul; left-wing and Islamic groups
         both claim responsibility for the assassination. <b>14 September: </b>Democratic Center Party merges with True Path Party. <b>17 September: </b>In Ankara, Patriotic Union of Kurdistan leader Talabani asks President Özal to lobby
         for continued presence of allied force in Turkey to protect Kurds in Iraq from possible
         attacks by that government. <b>1 October: </b>Saudi king Fahd informs President Özal that his country will donate $1 billion to
         the Turkish Defense Fund by providing Turkey with $200 million in crude oil each year
         for five years. <b>21 October: </b>Prime Minister Mesut Yılmaz resigns, as his Motherland Party trails behind the True
         Path Party (TPP) at the 20 October general elections. <b>24–26 October: </b>Turkish jets raid Kurdish rebel camps in northern Iraq. <b>19 November: </b>TPP leader Süleyman Demirel signs pact with Social Democratic Populist Party leader
         Erdal İnönü to form a coalition government; the coalition controls 266 of 450 seats.
         <b>25 December: </b>In Istanbul, firebombs are thrown at department store owned by the brother of Necati
         Çetinkaya, the recently appointed governor-general of Turkey’s southeastern provinces.
         <b>26 December: </b>In Paris, a previously unknown group called the Kurdistan Committee seizes the Turkish
         embassy to protest the alleged assassination of 30 people in Kulp and Lice (both in
         southeastern Turkey) by the Turkish army. <b>29 December: </b>Nationalist Action Party (NAP) merges with Nationalist Labor Party (NLP). The NLP
         then elects former NAP leader Alparslan Türkeş as its leader.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.122"><b>1992</b>   <b>15 January: </b>Parliamentary Human Rights Commission presents a report proposing stringent security
         measures combined with religious propaganda to combat the spread of Kurdish nationalism.
         <b>19 January: </b>Speaker of Parliament rejects request by Ankara State Security Court to lift the parliamentary
         immunity of 22 former members of Kurdish-backed People’s Toiling Party, who entered
         Parliament on the Social Democratic Populist Party (SDPP) ticket. <b>2 February: </b>Prime Minister Süleyman Demirel and Greek prime minister Constantine Mitsotakis agree
         to prepare accord of “friendship, good-neighborliness, and cooperation” and back UN-sponsored
         efforts to reunite Cyprus. <b>3 February: </b>Black Sea Economic Cooperation Project initialed by foreign ministers of nine countries
         in Istanbul. <b>11 February: </b>In talks in Washington, D.C., U.S. president George H. W. Bush and Prime Minister
         Demirel agree to increase aid to Central Asian and Transcaucasia republics. <b>16 February: </b>Government increases customs duties and/or special fund provisions on more than 70
         key import commodities, while denying return to protectionism. <b>21 February: </b>Turkey conducts military exercises near Armenian border against background of growing
         tension between Azerbaijan and Armenia over the disputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh.
         <b>26 February: </b>Parliamentary Human Rights Commission concludes that ban on head scarves in universities
         is an infringement of human rights. <b>3 March: </b>Prime Minister Demirel calls on United States and Russian Federation not to arm Armenia
         amid growing fears that conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh could drag into neighboring
         countries. <b>9 March: </b>Prime Minister Demirel announces that Kurds can celebrate Newroz (Kurdish New Year)
         on 21 March. <b>13 March: </b>European Parliament condemns Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) but calls for a halt to
         cross-border operations because civilians are being killed. <b>18 March: </b>Prime Minister Demirel asks United States to seek diplomatic solution to fighting
         between Armenians and Azerbaijanis over Nagorno-Karabakh and says Turkey is being
         forced to get involved. <b>21–22 March: </b>Clashes erupt between army and Kurds following Kurdish rebels’ call on supporters
         to stage demonstrations during the Newroz. <b>26 March: </b>Ankara and Washington sign agreement enabling Turkey to produce 40 additional F-16
         fighter planes. Germany announces plans to suspend all arms shipments to Turkey until
         Ankara guarantees that the weapons are not being used against population in southeast.
         <b>30 March: </b>Prime Minister Demirel warns Syria to stop supporting PKK rebels. <b>26 April: </b>Prime Minister Demirel begins trip to Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
         Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan in effort to further develop Turkey’s relations with
         newly established Central Asian countries. <b>5 May:</b> Germany lifts ban on military aid to Turkey. <b>7 June: </b>Local by-elections held: True Path Party wins 173 municipalities; Social Democratic
         Populist Party, 70; Motherland Party, 52; Welfare Party, 15; Democratic Left Party,
         1. <b>13 June: </b>Tansu Çiller becomes True Path Party (TPP) leader. <b>2 July: </b>Ban lifted on political parties closed down by 1980 military intervention. <b>5 July:</b> Tansu Çiller becomes prime minister, to lead TPP-SDPP coalition. <b>10 July: </b>Constitutional Court bans Socialist Party on charges of engaging in separatist activity.
         <b>14 July: </b>Constitutional Court closes pro-Kurdish People’s Toiling Party. <b>27 August: </b>Turkey establishes diplomatic relations with Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia,
         and Slovenia. <b>9 September: </b>Republican People’s Party, banned after 1980 military intervention, reopens; Deniz
         Baykal elected chairman. <b>10 September: </b>Democratic Party, closed by military after 1960 coup, reopens after 32 years; former
         foreign minister Hayrettin Erkmen becomes chairman. <b>14 September: </b>Iran agrees to cooperate with Turkey in efforts to fight PKK. <b>19 September: </b>Party members raise Kurdish flag and sing their national anthem during second People’s
         Toiling Party extraordinary convention in Ankara. <b>7 October: </b>New Party established. <b>14 October: </b> <i>Financial Times </i>survey ranks Turkey among the top 30 countries in the world in terms of creditworthiness
         and ability to pay. <b>6 November: </b>Socialist Turkey Party founded. <b>15 November: </b>Turkey and Israel sign a treaty of friendship. <b>19 November: </b>Criminal Trials Procedure Act amended in more liberal direction. <b>23 November: </b>Hasan Celal Güzel founds Resurrection Party and becomes its chairman. <b>19 December: </b>Justice Party convention closes the party and hands over all property and original
         emblem to TPP. <b>24 December: </b>Parliament renews mandate for Operation Provide Comfort for protecting the northern
         Iraqis.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.123"><b>1993</b>   <b>14 January: </b>Turkish armed forces put on red alert following allied air strikes on Iraq. Prime
         Minister Süleyman Demirel visits Syria, where he is told that Syria will not back
         Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) rebels. <b>23 January: </b>A secret report submitted to the National Security Council (NSC) accuses Hizbullah
         (Party of God) of committing unsolved murders in the southeast and seeking to introduce
         Sharia law in the country. <b>29 January: </b>Great Unity Party established. <b>30 January: </b>All European Union (EU) countries, except Denmark, Great Britain, and Ireland, are
         to issue “joint visas” to Turkish citizens. <b>9 February: </b>Prime Minister Demirel reveals that the Islamic Action group that claimed responsibility
         in the murder of journalist Uğur Mumcu had been trained in Iran. <b>23 February: </b>NSC proposes an economic package for the southeast since “recent military operations
         have broken the back of the PKK.” <b>3 March: </b>Turkey and EU are to establish a commission to oversee transition to Customs Union
         due in 1995. <b>15 March: </b>Government refuses to negotiate with PKK because it is a “terrorist organization.”
         <b>17 March: </b>PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan unilaterally declares a 25-day cease-fire; PKK fighters
         will not disarm until peace accord is reached with government. <b>16 April: </b>At press conference in Bar İlyas, Lebanon, Abdullah Öcalan announces indefinite extension
         of cease-fire begun on March 20. <b>17 April: </b>President Turgut Özal dies of heart attack. <b>16 May: </b>Parliament elects Süleyman Demirel president of the republic. Erdal İnönü becomes
         caretaker prime minister. <b>12 June: </b>U.S. secretary of state Warren Christopher asks Turkish government for compliance
         with U.S. proposal to reduce human rights violations. <b>13 June: </b>True Path Party elects Tansu Çiller as party leader. <b>14 June: </b>President Demirel appoints Çiller prime minister. <b>2 July: </b>Islamic rioters set fire to a hotel in Sivas that accommodated leftist writers and
         intellectuals, whom they accuse of spreading atheism. Forty people die while Aziz
         Nesin, who had published Salman Rushdie’s <i>Satanic Verses </i>and who apparently was the primary target, survives. <b>15 July: </b>Constitutional Court bans Kurdish-backed People’s Toiling Party. <b>16 August: </b>Foreign Minister Hikmet Çetin urges U.S. secretary of state Warren Christopher to
         help lift UN oil sanctions against Iraq, pointing out that sanctions not only hurt
         Iraqi government but also Iraqi and Turkish peoples. <b>11 September: </b>Ankara mayor Murat Karayalçın elected Republican People’s Party leader. <b>14 October: </b>Prime Minister Çiller arrives in United States for meetings with U.S. president Bill
         Clinton and other U.S. officials. <b>22 October: </b>Rebels kill Brigadier General Bahtiyar Aydın in Lice. <b>29 November: </b>Prime Ministry announces that air strikes were carried out against nine separatist
         targets in northern Iraq, with the knowledge of Iraqi authorities. <b>12 December: </b>Hatip Dicle becomes pro-Kurdish Democracy Party leader. <b>23 December: </b>Four pro-Kurdish Democracy Party deputies’ parliamentary immunity is lifted, making
         them liable for prosecution by Ankara State Security Court.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.124"><b>1994</b>   <b>28 February: </b>Prime Minister Tansu Çiller calls for a public rally at Istanbul’s Taksim Square to
         defend secularism against fundamentalist attacks symbolically aimed at Atatürk’s memory.
         <b>21 March: </b>Government adopts a flexible attitude toward celebration of Newroz (Kurdish New Year).
         <b>27 March: </b>At local elections, the municipalities of Ankara and Istanbul go to Welfare Party.
         <b>14 April: </b>Washington announces that the International Monetary Fund will support the government’s
         stabilization program. <b>15 April: </b>First meeting of Welfare Party–controlled Istanbul Municipality’s Council starts with
         Welfarists praying, while secular members sing the national anthem. <b>4 May: </b>World Bank approves a $100 million credit to support government’s privatization plans.
         <b>12 May: </b>People’s Democracy Party founded by members of Democracy Party. Government authorizes
         preliminary work on first nuclear power plant in Akkuyu. <b>18 May: </b>Government announces “democratization package.” <b>7 June: </b>Turkey warns Greece that any attempt to extend its territorial waters to 12 miles
         will be tantamount to a declaration of war. <b>16 June: </b>Twelve leading deputies of Democracy Party resign from their party. <b>17 June: </b>Constitutional Court bans Democracy Party. <b>1 July: </b>Turkey unilaterally imposes new shipping regulations for the straits of Bosporus and
         Dardanelles, including requiring Turkish permission for the passage of ships more
         than 150 meters long. <b>26 July: </b>Liberal Party formed by Besim Tibuk. <b>10 August: </b>Turkey’s second communications satellite, Türksat 1B, on course. <b>27 August: </b>Government rejects a plan for U.S. military aid, requiring favorable report on human
         rights in Turkey and on Greek-Turkish negotiations over Cyprus before the release
         of aid. <b>1 September: </b>European Union raises its quotas for imports of Turkish textiles by an average of
         35 percent. <b>9 September: </b>Turkey and Greece agree to start up regular talks as a means of solving their differences.
         <b>16 October: </b>Doğu Perinçek reelected Labor Party leader. <b>19 October: </b>President Süleyman Demirel refutes Russian Federation charges that Turkey is trying
         to create an ethnically based sphere of influence within the Commonwealth of Independent
         States. <b>3 November: </b>Turkey and Israel sign agreements on joint struggle against drug trafficking, terrorism,
         and other crimes and on communications and postal services. <b>6 November: </b>Social Democratic Populist Party and new Republican People’s Party merge. <b>9 November: </b>President Demirel launches Southeast Anatolia Project—a hydroelectric and irrigation
         project consisting of a complex of 22 dams on the Euphrates and Tigris Rivers; as
         it could reduce water supplies to Iraq and Syria, both countries oppose the plan.
         <b>8 December: </b>Five Kurdish members of Parliament—Selim Andak, Hatip Dicle, Orhan Doğan, Ahmet Türk,
         and Leyla Zana—are convicted of supporting the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and
         sentenced to 15 years in prison. <b>21 December: </b>High Military Court dismisses six officers from army because of their fundamentalist
         Islamic activities within ranks. <b>22 December: </b>Rich textile heir Cem Boyner’s New Democracy Movement transformed into a political
         party.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.125"><b>1995</b>   <b>10 January: </b>Prime Minister Tansu Çiller announces that Newroz (Kurdish New Year) is an official
         holiday in Turkey. <b>15 January: </b>Greece agrees to withdraw its veto against Turkey’s entry to Customs Union. <b>19 February: </b>Republican People’s Party (RPP) and Social Democratic People’s Party merge under RPP
         roof; Hikmet Çetin becomes leader of new party. <b>6 March: </b>Turkey’s entry into Customs Union with European Union approved. <b>12 March: </b>After an unidentified group opens automatic gunfire on a neighborhood coffeehouse,
         riots by Alevite community break out in poor districts of Istanbul, leading to clashes
         with police; life and property lost; army units step in and curfew imposed. <b>18 March: </b>Germany bans all Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) activities within its borders and
         starts to deport illegal activists back to Turkey. <b>20 March: </b>Government forces numbering 35,000 enter northern Iraq to conduct operations against
         PKK rebels with armored battalions. <b>2 April: </b>U.S. deputy secretary of state Richard Holbrooke supports Turkey’s operation in northern
         Iraq, adding that security of Turkey’s borders affects the security of Europe. <b>11 April: </b>PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan says he is prepared to negotiate a political solution to
         the conflict in the southeast; government not willing to negotiate with a “terrorist.”
         <b>19 April: </b>Prime Minister Çiller meets with U.S. president Bill Clinton in Washington, D.C.;
         Clinton urges Çiller to pull Turkish forces out of northern Iraq. <b>21 April: </b>Armenia and Turkey agree to reopen an air route between Erzurum in eastern Turkey
         and Yerevan in Armenia. <b>26 April: </b>Netherlands refuses to ban Kurdish Parliament in exile at The Hague; in return, Turkish
         government bars the Netherlands from bidding on defense contracts. <b>27 April: </b>United States and Japan devise a $500 million loan for Turkey. <b>30 April: </b>President Süleyman Demirel refuses to go to Moscow to attend celebrations marking
         50th anniversary of the end of World War II in protest of Russian Federation aggressions
         against Chechens in that federation. <b>8 May: </b>Nationalist Action Party leader Alparslan Türkeş says Turks and Kurds lived together
         for 900 years and, consequently, he cannot imagine a Turk being an enemy of a Kurd.
         <b>13 May: </b>Russian Federation promises to exclude PKK activities from Russian Federation. <b>1 June: </b>Despite Turkish protests, Greece extends its territorial waters to 12 miles. <b>9 July: </b>Accord reached with Uzbekistan for the transport of Uzbek natural gas to Turkey via
         Turkmenistan–Georgia line. <b>23 July: </b>Parliament lowers voting age from 21 to 18 and allows political participation by unions.
         International Securities Free Zone established in Istanbul. <b>28 July: </b>Istanbul Gold Exchange inaugurated. <b>10 August: </b>Accord reached between Turkey and Bosnia-Herzegovina; Turkey will train Bosnian troops
         and aid the Bosnian defense industry. <b>10 September: </b>Deniz Baykal becomes Republican People’s Party (RPP) leader. <b>20 September: </b>Prime Minister Çiller resigns following withdrawal of RPP from its coalition with
         Çiller’s True Path Party (TPP). <b>5 November: </b>Çiller’s TPP and Baykal’s RPP form coalition government. <b>2 December: </b>Religiously oriented Welfare Party (WP) declares it is not against bank interest.
         <b>13 December: </b>European Parliament admits Turkey into Customs Union with European Union, effective
         1 January 1996. <b>14 December: </b>PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan declares a unilateral cease-fire. <b>24 December: </b>General elections held. Religiously oriented WP obtains plurality of votes, followed
         by True Path Party, Motherland Party, Democratic Left Party, and Republican People’s
         Party.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.126"><b>1996</b>   <b>27 January: </b>Political crisis erupts over Kardak islets on the Aegean Sea amid Turkish and Greek
         claims of sovereignty over islets. <b>13 February:</b> Turkmenistan and Turkey sign accord for supply of natural gas to Turkey. <b>13 March: </b>Motherland Party (MP) and True Path Party (TPP) form coalition government; Mesut Yılmaz
         of the MP will become prime minister for one year, Tansu Çiller of the TPP will take
         over prime ministry from Yılmaz for two years, and an unnamed member of the MP will
         serve as prime minister during the last two years of the parliamentary term. <b>21 March: </b>Prime Minister Mesut Yılmaz celebrates Newroz (Kurdish New Year) in the southeastern
         town of Iğdır. <b>24 March: </b>Parliament votes to conduct an investigation into charges that former prime minister
         Tansu Çiller manipulated government contracts for personal gain. <b>8 April: </b>Arab League pronounces signing of military cooperation agreement between Turkey and
         Israel as “show of ill will” and an “act of aggression.” <b>10 April: </b>Tension between Iran and Turkey mounts over countercharges of spying. <b>23 April: </b>Parliament approves Welfare Party motion to open investigation on former prime minister
         Çiller for her part in mishandling of privatization bid; Athens vetoes 3.4 billion
         euros earmarked for Turkey by the European Union (EU). <b>25 May: </b>TPP leader Çiller withdraws her party from coalition. <b>26 May: </b>Council of Ministers meets in southeastern city of Diyarbakır, underlining the importance
         of the region. <b>2 June: </b>Local elections held; Welfare Party (WP) garners plurality of votes, followed by Motherland
         Party (MP), True Path Party (TPP), Democratic Left Party, Grand Turkey Party, Republican
         People’s Party, Nationalist Action Party, and People’s Democracy Party. <b>6 June: </b>Prime Minister Yılmaz resigns, ending the TPP-MP coalition. WP leader Necmettin Erbakan
         assures that his party is not antidemocratic, it has no plans to relinquish Turkey’s
         membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and it backs a customs union
         with the EU. Government rejects $22 million economic aid package from United States
         because of stipulations calling for Turkey to cease its blockade of a humanitarian
         aid package to Armenia. <b>12 June: </b>President Süleyman Demirel responds harshly to claims by Saudi Arabia that Turkey’s
         cooperation pact with Israel could deteriorate relations with Arab world. <b>13 June: </b>Government armed forces launch a new offensive into northern Iraq; 5,000 troops go
         seven kilometers into territory. <b>19 June: </b>Croatia and Turkey sign agreement on military cooperation. WP votes with TPP to turn
         down a former WP motion to hold parliamentary investigations into charges that TPP
         leader Çiller misused discretionary funds at her disposal as then prime minister.
         <b>23 June: </b>In Ankara, 30 leading members of pro-Kurdish People’s Democracy Party arrested after
         a party convention where the Turkish flag was brought down by masked militants. <b>28 June: </b>WP and TPP form coalition government. WP leader Necmettin Erbakan is prime minister
         and TPP leader Çiller deputy prime minister and foreign minister. <b>11 July: </b>Turkish warplanes hit Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) base on Iraqi border. <b>19 October: </b>Deputy Prime Minister Çiller announces new democratization and human rights package
         in response to criticism from Europe. <b>25 November: </b>Prime Minister Erbakan announces he will not attend EU conference in Dublin. Parliamentary
         committee investigating charges of corruption against former prime minister Çiller
         declares charges unsubstantiated. <b>28 November: </b>Parliamentary commission studying corruption charges against deputy prime minister
         and foreign minister Çiller decides against sending her to High Court.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.127"><b>1997</b>   <b>20 January: </b>Turkey and Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) sign historic declaration: Any
         attack on the TRNC is tantamount to an attack on Turkey itself. <b>23 January: </b>Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan heavily criticized for inviting leaders of religious
         orders to dinner at his official residence. <b>28 February: </b>National Security Council states that “secularism is not only a form of government
         but also a way of life and the guarantee of democracy and social peace,” a warning
         to the Erbakan government to refrain from efforts to Islamize society and polity;
         the council recommends to the government 20 specific measures to combat “reactionary
         Islam.” <b>15 April: </b>Turkey becomes a full member of Western European Union. <b>28 April: </b>Black Sea Economic Cooperation Conference held in Istanbul. <b>30 April: </b>Greece and Turkey agree to establish a group of “wise men” to help resolve their differences.
         <b>5 May: </b>Israel, Turkey, and United States to conduct joint naval exercises in the Mediterranean
         at the end of summer; strong reactions come from Arab countries. <b>28 May: </b>Major unions and business representatives agree to hold a huge protest rally against
         the Erbakan government. <b>30 May: </b>U.S. president Bill Clinton opens the way for Turkey to receive $22 million from the
         Economic Support Fund in 1997. <b>12 June: </b>Office of chief of General Staff announces it has set up a West Study Group to better
         monitor Islamic fundamentalism in the country. <b>18 June: </b>Prime Minister Erbakan resigns and calls on President Süleyman Demirel to appoint
         Tansu Çiller prime minister. <b>30 June: </b>Democratic Left Party of Bülent Ecevit, Democratic Turkey Party of Hüsamettin Cindoruk,
         and Motherland Party of Mesut Yılmaz form coalition government; Yılmaz is prime minister.
         <b>6 July: </b>Nationalist Action Party elects Devlet Bahçeli as new leader. <b>8 July:</b> Greek prime minister Costas Simitis and President Demirel pledge to reconcile differences
         without use of force and recognize each country’s legitimate interests in Aegean Sea.
         <b>16 August: </b>Parliament adopts eight-year compulsory secular education. <b>30 September: </b>Prime Minister Yılmaz obtains German chancellor Helmut Kohl’s support for Turkey’s
         European Union (EU) candidacy. <b>10 November: </b>In a change of policy encouraged by French president Jacques Chirac and German chancellor
         Helmut Kohl, EU foreign ministers agree in principle to invite Turkey to the EU conference.
         <b>4 December: </b>Government issues a set of directives intended to curb police brutality of suspects,
         including surprise visits to police stations. <b>13 December: </b>EU excludes Turkey in membership talks for the first and second wave of union expansion;
         Ankara resolves to suspend relations with EU. <b>19 December: </b>Prime Minister Yılmaz threatens to withdraw Turkey’s application to join the EU if
         the union does not reverse its decision to exclude Turkey from the next wave of expansion.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.128"><b>1998</b>   <b>16 January: </b>Constitutional Court bans Welfare Party “because of evidence confirming its actions
         against the principles of the secular republic.” <b>8 February: </b>Fifty thousand Turkish soldiers enter a 240-kilometer-long “buffer zone” in northern
         Iraq to prevent an influx of Kurdish refugees to Turkey in the event of war. <b>7 March: </b>Prime Minister Mesut Yılmaz accuses Germany of following a policy of lebensraum (creating
         a living space for Germany) to block Turkey’s membership in the European Union. <b>17 March: </b>Appeals court acquits former prime minister Tansu Çiller on one of a series of charges
         made against her on the grounds that there was no evidence Çiller knowingly misused
         government funds. <b>27 March: </b>National Security Council recommends to Yılmaz government a list of steps to “curb
         the influence of those who wish to condemn the Turkish people to a backward way of
         life.” <b>16 April: </b>Parliament votes to open new investigation into former prime minister Çiller’s accumulation
         of wealth between 1991 and 1996. <b>22 April: </b>Parliament votes to investigate personal finances of Prime Minister Yılmaz. <b>29 April: </b>Court orders former prime minister Necmettin Erbakan to stand trial for defying the
         judiciary. <b>10 May: </b>Reformist group in Virtue Party (VP), led by Bülent Arınç, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and
         Abdullah Gül, wishes to democratize the party and pull it closer to the center of
         political spectrum. <b>12 May: </b>Parliament votes to open new investigations against Prime Minister Yılmaz over allegations
         that he improperly awarded a contract to supporters to build an airport in Istanbul.
         <b>15 May: </b>VP, successor party to Welfare Party, elects Recai Kutan as its leader. <b>20 May: </b>Chief of General Staff Hakkı Karadayı officially warns Russian Federation government
         regarding their plans to sell S-300 missiles to the Republic of Cyprus. <b>7 July: </b>Turkey protests Greek militarization of islands in Aegean Sea, near Turkey’s coast.
         <b>7 September: </b>Israeli and Turkish prime ministers meet in Israel to discuss ways to develop trade
         between the two countries. VP parliamentarian Ersönmez Yarbay states that the new
         VP would have a less dogmatic and more contemporary image than its predecessor, the
         WP. <b>6 October: </b>Government announces a 10-day ultimatum: if Syria does not curb its support of the
         Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), the military will start cross-border operations to
         PKK targets in Syria. <b>6 November: </b>Turkey imposes new navigation rules for Bosporus Strait, including the ability to
         stop traffic when currents are unfavorable, stop any ship on legal grounds, and require
         more ships to use local pilots. <b>8 November: </b>Military pursues PKK rebels into northern Iraq. <b>19 November: </b>Authorities arrest People’s Democracy Party chairperson Murat Bozlak for referring
         to Abdullah Öcalan in public as a “party leader” rather than a “terrorist.” <b>23 November: </b>True Path Party and Motherland Party cooperate to save their leaders, Çiller and Yılmaz,
         respectively. In the voting, the parliamentary commission investigating their cases
         decides against sending the leaders to High Court. <b>25 November: </b>Prime Minister Yılmaz’s government loses a vote of confidence due to corruption allegations.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.129"><b>1999</b>   <b>17 January: </b>Minority government formed by Democratic Left Party leader Bülent Ecevit receives
         vote of confidence; government is supported from outside by Motherland Party and True
         Path Party. <b>16 February: </b>Greek embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, hands over Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) leader
         Abdullah Öcalan to Kenyan authorities; while on his way to an unspecified destination
         in Nairobi, Öcalan is captured by Turkish commando units and flown to Turkey on a
         Turkish plane sent for this operation to Kenya. <b>15 March: </b>Fifteen thousand members of Turkish government forces enter Iraq in hot pursuit of
         PKK rebels. <b>18 April: </b>General elections held; Democratic Left Party of Ecevit obtains plurality of votes,
         followed by Motherland Party (MP) of Mesut Yılmaz, Nationalist Action Party (NAP)
         of Devlet Bahçeli, and True Path Party (TPP) of Tansu Çiller. Virtue Party (VP) of
         Recai Kutan, Republican People’s Party, and People’s Toiling Party votes remain below
         10 percent threshold. <b>30 April: </b>U.S. State Department report criticizes Germany, Italy, and Greece for their lack
         of conviction in Turkey’s fight against one of the world’s major terror and drug-smuggling
         organizations, namely PKK. <b>2 May: </b>President Süleyman Demirel says head scarf is a symbol of political Islam; VP’s newly
         elected deputy, Merve Kavakçı, is prevented from taking oath of office when she refuses
         to remove her head scarf. Prime Minister Ecevit emphatically declares, “Parliament
         is not a place to defy the state.” <b>28 May: </b>Coalition government among Democratic Left Party (DLP), Nationalist Action Party,
         and Motherland Party formed. DLP leader Bülent Ecevit is prime minister. <b>18 June: </b>Military judges removed from state security courts. <b>26 June: </b>Prime Minister Ecevit releases a circular on human rights and freedom of thought,
         asking that directives issued to date be strictly adhered to. Republican People’s
         Party chooses Altan Öymen as new leader. <b>29 June: </b>Court sentences PKK leader Öcalan to death for treason. <b>26 September: </b>Turkey to be included in newly formed G20 countries, which comprise G7 countries,
         10 large developing countries, and representatives from the European Union (EU), International
         Monetary Fund (IMF), and World Bank. <b>28 September: </b>Prime Minister Ecevit meets U.S. president Bill Clinton at White House. Clinton expresses
         U.S. interest in finding a solution to lingering Cyprus crisis, says improvements
         in human rights and Greek-Turkey relations will reflect in the process of Turkey’s
         full membership in the EU, and gives assurances that a Kurdish state will not be established
         in northern Iraq. <b>3 November: </b>During state visit in Moscow, Prime Minister Ecevit says Turkey respects territorial
         integrity of Russian Federation; however, he adds, Turkey is concerned about civilian
         casualties in Chechnya. <b>14 November: </b>President Clinton comes to Turkey to attend the Organization of Security and Co-operation
         in Europe (OSCE) summit in Istanbul. <b>15 November: </b>In a speech made at the Turkish National Assembly, President Clinton says Turkey plays
         a critical role in the development of the region and that in the 21st century it should
         take courageous steps so that it continues to have such an impact. <b>17 November: </b>Black Sea Economic Cooperation summit convenes in Istanbul. In his opening speech,
         President Demirel says that the Black Sea Economic Community will serve to link Asia
         and Europe, on the one hand, and the Black Sea, the Caspian Sea, and Mediterranean
         basins on the other hand to promote peace and prosperity in the region. <b>18 November: </b>OSCE summit opens in Istanbul. In his opening speech, President Demirel says everyone
         failed to adopt timely measures to stem recent conflicts arising from ethnic problems.
         Azerbaijani president Ilham Aliyev, Georgian president Eduard Shevardnadze, and President
         Demirel sign package agreements on Baku–Tbilisi–Ceyhan cross-border pipeline. <b>10 December: </b>At Helsinki Summit, Turkey named candidate country for EU. <b>22 December: </b>Turkey and IMF sign standby agreement; government promises to launch series of economic
         reforms over next three years in exchange for IMF loans totaling $4 billion. <b>27 December: </b>President Demirel wishes Christian citizens of Turkey a Merry Christmas, the first
         official state recognition of the holiday.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.130"><b>2000</b>   <b>3 February: </b>In the first visit to Greece by a Turkish foreign minister, İsmail Cem arrives in
         Athens to sign five accords ranging from culture to maritime transit. <b>9 February: </b>PKK announces it has ended its armed struggle against the government forces and that
         it will pursue its efforts “within the framework of peace and democracy.” <b>10 February: </b>VP breaks a taboo of its own and celebrates Valentine’s Day. <b>4 March: </b>Court of Appeals allows use of Kurdish names. <b>10 March: </b>Former prime minister Necmettin Erbakan is given one-year prison sentence on the grounds
         that a speech he made in 1994 incited hatred and enmity among people. <b>5 May: </b>Parliament elects Ahmet Necdet Sezer, former chairman of the Constitutional Court,
         as Turkey’s 10th president. <b>14 May: </b>VP leader Recai Kutan reelected party’s chairman. <b>17 July: </b>European Union (EU) asks Turkey to allow for broadcasting and education in Kurdish
         as conditions for inclusion in the EU as a full member. <b>21 July: </b>Turkish Petroleum Agency privatized. <b>15 August: </b>Turkey signs United Nations Civil and Political Rights Charter and the Economic, Social,
         and Cultural Rights Charter. <b>30 August: </b>Public prosecutor files a suit against Fethullah Gülen, leader of Fethullah Islamic
         Movement, for “activities directed toward the establishment of a state based on Islam.”
         <b>30 September: </b>Deniz Baykal elected chairman of the Republican People’s Party after a 15-month interval.
         <b>4 November: </b>Devlet Bahçeli reelected chairman of the Nationalist Action Party. <b>24 November: </b>Government privatizes three major state banks—Emlak Bank, Halk Bank, and Ziraat Bank—as
         part of a plan to withdraw from the financial sector. <b>27 November: </b>Director of the National Intelligence Agency supports television broadcasts in Kurdish.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.131"><b>2001</b>   <b>1 January: </b>President Ahmet Necdet Sezer says Turkey needs to improve its human rights and democratization
         record and remove financial irregularities. <b>21 February: </b>Critical confrontation between President Sezer and Prime Minister Bülent Ecevit leads
         to the most critical financial crisis during the Republican period. <b>22 February: </b>Transition to fluctuating rate (within limits) in foreign exchange. <b>2 March: </b>Kemal Derviş, former deputy director of the World Bank, becomes state minister responsible
         for the economy. <b>14 March: </b>New economic program disclosed: the banking sector will be overhauled, interest and
         foreign exchange rates will be stabilized, and populism will be avoided. <b>29 April: </b>At the Democratic Left Party Fifth Congress, Ecevit is again elected chairman. <b>12 May: </b>Parliament passes law to privatize the Telecommunications Agency. <b>15 May: </b>International Monetary Fund approves augmentation of Turkey’s standby credit to $19
         billion. <b>26 June: </b>Constitutional Court closes the VP on the grounds that it acted against the secular
         premises of the republic. <b>11 July: </b>Macedonia and Turkey sign cooperation agreement. <b>18 July: </b>European Human Rights Court condemns Turkey to pay 270,000 francs as compensation
         for death under custody. <b>14 August: </b>Justice and Development Party (JDP) formed under the leadership of former mayor of
         Istanbul Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. <b>29 August: </b>Süreyya Ayhan wins gold medal at women’s racing finals in China. <b>September: </b>United Nations agrees to pay $176,300,000 to BOTAŞ for its losses in Gulf War. <b>16 October: </b>United States announces that Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and Revolutionary People’s
         Liberation Party-Front (DHKP-C) are “international terrorist organizations.” <b>20 October: </b>Abdi İpekçi Friendship and Peace prize given to the Turkish and Greek ministers of
         agriculture. <b>12 November: </b>Socialist Workers’ Party officially changes its name to Turkish Communist Party. World
         Bank elevates Turkey from “middle income” to “high middle income” state status; International
         Labor Organization depicts Turkey as a “developed” country. <b>15 December: </b>European Investment Bank extends 185 million euro credits.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.132"><b>2002</b>   <b>6 March: </b>Former chair of the Welfare Party Necmettin Erbakan is condemned to imprisonment for
         forgery in financial scam. <b>24 May: </b>Murat Karayalçın founds the Social Democratic People’s Party. <b>3 August: </b>Capital punishment abrogated by legislation, except in cases of war or threat of war.
         <b>22 August: </b>Orhan Pamuk’s novel <i>My Name Is Red</i> selected as the best foreign novel in France. <b>13 December: </b>Parliament ratifies constitutional amendments to facilitate Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s
         election as member of Parliament.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.133"><b>2003</b>   <b>1 March: </b>Parliament rejects resolution to deploy U.S. troops on Turkish soil for attack on
         Iraq. <b>9 March: </b>Justice and Development Party leader Recep Tayyip Erdoğan elected as a member of Parliament
         from Siirt. <b>13 March: </b>Constitutional Court bans People’s Democracy Party. <b>11 May: </b>Recai Kutan elected chairman of Felicity Party at its first convention. <b>17 May: </b>Prime Minister Erdoğan announces Greek Cypriots may visit Turkey visa free. <b>20 May: </b>Orhan Pamuk receives one of the most prestigious literature prizes in the world, Impac-Dublin,
         for his novel <i>My Name Is Red</i>. <b>25 May: </b>Turkey takes first place in 48th Eurovision song contest. <b>7 October: </b>Resolution to send Turkish soldiers to Iraq rejected in Parliament. <b>15 November: </b>Bomb attacks on two synagogues in Istanbul, Neve Shalom and Beth Israel.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.134"><b>2004</b>   <b>7 January: </b>United States begins to utilize the İncirlik Air Base as transit point for rotation
         of soldiers in Iraq. <b>9 March</b> <b>:</b> Bomb explosions at Istanbul-Kartal Masonic Lodge. <b>24 March: </b>Court in Şanlıurfa denies applications to change names to Kurdish because the Turkish
         alphabet does not contain the letters Q, W, or X. <b>24 April: </b>United Nations secretary-general Kofi Annan’s plan for a resolution to the Cyprus
         problem welcomed by the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus; South Cyprus rejects
         the plan. <b>21 May: </b>State Security Courts abolished. <b>7 June: </b>First broadcast in the mother tongue made in Bosnian. <b>17 August: </b>Ambassador Yiğit Alpogan appointed as the first civilian secretary-general of the
         National Security Council. <b>17 December: </b>Fatih Akın’s movie <i>Against the Wall</i> wins European best movie award.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.135"><b>2005</b>   <b>1 January: </b>Six zeros dropped from Turkish currency. <b>19 January: </b>London Royal Academy of Arts hosts exhibition “Turkey: A Thousand Years’ Journey,
         600–1600.” <b>16 February: </b>Feridun Zaimoğlu awarded German Adelbert von Chamisso literature prize. <b>4 May: </b>Flutist Şefika Kutluer awarded the golden CD of major Swiss recording firms, VDE-GALLO.
         <b>20 May: </b>Orhan Pamuk elected honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Literature.
         <b>7 June: </b>Minister of education announces extension of lyceé education from three to four years.
         <b>20 June: </b>Metin Kaplan, leader of the Islamic Union Associations in Germany, sentenced to life
         imprisonment after being deported from Germany for terrorism charges. <b>22 June: </b>Pamuk awarded peace prize by German Publishers’ Union. <b>20 July: </b>Labor Party chairman Doğu Perinçek taken into custody in Switzerland for stating that
         claims of Armenian genocide are an international falsity. <b>25 July: </b>Tülay Tuğcu elected chair of Constitutional Court to serve as its first female chair.
         <b>24 September: </b>Controversial conference on “Ottoman Armenians during the Last Phase of Empire: Scientific
         Responsibility and Problems of Democracy” takes place at Istanbul Bilgi University.
         <b>3 October: </b>European Union Intergovernmental Conference opens for accession negotiations with
         Turkey. <b>7 November: </b>Pamuk wins Le Prix Médicis Étranger for his novel <i>Snow</i>.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.136"><b>2006</b>   <b>5 February: </b>Priest Andrea Santore of the Santa Maria Catholic Church in Trabzon murdered. <b>14 February: </b>European Human Rights Court upholds Turkey’s decision to ban head scarves at universities.
         <b>16 February: </b>Political Bureau chief of Hamas, Haled Mashal, arrives in Turkey for talks. <b>7 March: </b>Communications Regulatory Agency facilitates broadcasts in various Kurdish languages/dialects
         in radio and television stations of Diyarbakır and Şanlıurfa. <b>23 March: </b>Broadcasts in Kurdish begin on private radio and television channels. <b>11 April: </b>United Nations Committee on Discrimination against Women rejects application regarding
         dismissal from university for wearing a head scarf. <b>26 April: </b>Iraq extends a protest note to Turkey for deploying military forces on the border
         to prevent terrorist infiltration into Turkey. <b>17 May: </b>An armed attack on the Council of State results in one judge dead and four members
         wounded. <b>23 May: </b>Greek and Turkish F-16s collide over the Aegean airspace. <b>8 June: </b>Second Turkish-Arab Economic Forum begins in Istanbul. <b>26 June: </b>European Union Commission agrees to extend 130 million euros in aid to the Northern
         Republic of Cyprus and establish a bureau in the area. <b>13 July: </b>The Baku–Tbilisi–Ceyhan oil pipeline officially becomes operational. <b>7 August: </b>Turkey extends $1.2 million in humanitarian aid to Lebanon. <b>8 August: </b>King Saud of Saudi Arabia visits Turkey and signs six agreements. <b>25 August: </b>British Parliament votes to ban Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and its sideline associations.
         <b>5 September: </b>Turkey’s Parliament ratifies proposal to send military contingency to Lebanon by 340
         votes against 192. <b>3 October: </b>Turkish Airlines flight to Tirana is hijacked to Italy; terrorist gives himself up.
         <b>12 October: </b>Nobel Prize for Literature awarded to Orhan Pamuk. Constitutional amendment passes
         to decrease age for election to Parliament from 30 to 25. <b>20 October: </b>Amnesty International announces that French law criminalizing denial of Armenian genocide
         is against freedom of expression. <b>16 November: </b>United Nations secretary-general Kofi Annan invites by letter presidents of the two
         Cypriot states to commence talks. <b>27 November: </b>German chancellor Angela Merkel states “privileged partnership” status of Turkey to
         European Union is appropriate. <b>29 November: </b>European Union Commission indefinitely postpones eight accession negotiation articles.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.137"><b>2007</b>   <b>19 January: </b>Editor of weekly <i>Agos </i>newspaper, Hrant Dink, assassinated in Istanbul. <b>24 January: </b>Some 100,000 people attend Dink’s funeral. <b>29 January: </b>Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan pledges $2 million in aid to Africa in fight against
         hunger and AIDS. <b>31 January: </b>Armenian genocide resolution reaches U.S. House of Representatives. <b>7 February: </b>Agreement for construction of Kars–Tbilisi–Baku railway signed in Tbilisi. <b>13 March: </b>Minister of national defense states that Turkey will not participate in the U.S. missile
         shield project. <b>14 April: </b>“Republican demonstrations” protest government and uphold secularism. <b>24 April: </b>Minister of Foreign Affairs Abdullah Gül makes application to Parliament as presidential
         candidate. <b>1 May: </b>Constitutional Court denounces the first round of voting in the Parliament for president
         as unconstitutional. <b>9 May: </b>Foreign Minister Gül withdraws as candidate for president. <b>11 May: </b>Constitutional amendment to facilitate presidential elections by national vote accepted
         in Parliament. <b>23 May: </b>France’s European Union (EU) minister, Jean-Pierre Jouyet, lends support to Merkel’s
         proposal for Turkey’s “privileged partnership” with EU. <b>22 July: </b>Justice and Development Party wins the general elections by 46 percent of nationwide
         vote. The elections bring 23 Kurds to Parliament as members of Democratic Society
         Party and end more than 10 years of Kurdish exclusion from Parliament. <b>28 August: </b>Abdullah Gül, who served as prime minister from 2002 to 2003 and as foreign minister
         from 2003 to 2007, is elected by Parliament as 11th president of Turkey. <b>10 September: </b>French president Nicholas Sarkozy announces his stance against Turkey’s full membership
         in the EU: “privileged partnership.” <b>19 September:</b> Turkish court blocks all access to YouTube for sharing videos insulting Mustafa Kemal
         Atatürk, President Gül, Prime Minister Erdoğan, and Turkish army. <b>11 October:</b> Turkey temporarily recalls its ambassador to the United States, Nabi Şensoy, due
         to U.S. House Foreign Affairs Committee’s approval of labeling the killings of ethnic
         Armenians by the Ottoman Empire during World War I as genocide. <b>17 October: </b>Turkish Parliament approves a motion that allows Turkish troops to cross the border
         into northern Iraq in its fight with PKK. <b>20 October: </b>PKK ambushes military convoy, killing 12 soldiers and wounding 16. <b>11 November: </b>Israel’s president, Shimon Peres, visits Ankara and is conferred an honorary degree.
         <b>18 November: </b>Turkey–Greece natural gas pipeline interconnector inaugurated. <b>29 November: </b>Answering a Spanish journalist’s question on the head scarf ban at universities, Prime
         Minister Erdoğan says, “So what if it is a political symbol,” and starts one of the
         most heated controversies by following up with an amendment to the constitution. <b>2 December: </b>Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel, reiterates privileged partnership for Turkey’s
         association with the EU. <b>4 December: </b>United Nations secretary-general Ban Ki-moon states no progress in Cyprus talks. <b>19 December: </b>Armenian Parliament spokesman rejects Turkey’s preconditions to normalize relations.
         <b>20 December: </b>Earthquake in Ankara’s Bala province of 5.7 on the Richter scale; no loss of life.
         <b>29 December: </b>General Staff announces Greek air force thrice impeded Turkish air force training
         in international airspace over Aegean Sea.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.138"><b>2008</b>   <b>16 January: </b>President Abdullah Gül inaugurates Turkish industrial zone in Cairo. <b>20 January: </b>Turkish court bans the website YouTube under a court order issued in response to videos
         for allegedly insulting Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, considered the father of modern Turkey.
         <b>1 February: </b>Constitutional Committee of Parliament approves amendment to constitution to allow
         head scarves at universities; Interuniversity Council denounces the decision as damaging
         secularism. <b>2 February: </b>In Ankara, more than 100,000 people stage protest against the constitutional amendment
         to lift the ban on head scarves in universities. <b>9 February: </b>Parliament approves lifting ban on head scarves at universities. <b>17–18 February: </b>Turkey joins Albania, France, Great Britain, and the United States in recognizing
         independent Kosovo. <b>21 February: </b>Turkish Parliament passes a law that restores all state-confiscated properties back
         to non-Muslim minority owners. <b>22 February: </b>President Gül signs constitutional amendment to lift the ban on head scarves at universities.
         <b>1 March: </b>Professor İlber Ortaylı, poet Ataol Behramoğlu, and director of the Russian Federation-Turkey
         Research Center, Hasan Aksay, receive the Pushkin Award from the Russian Federation.
         <b>4 March: </b>Following the European Human Rights Court decision, Turkey’s Council of State upholds
         that compulsory religious courses at schools are unlawful. <b>7 March: </b>Constitutional Court agrees to consider the case against freedom to wear head scarves
         at universities. <b>8 March: </b>Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan recommends Turkish women bear at least three children.
         <b>12 March: </b>Justice and Development Party (JDP) government announces that it plans to invest more
         than $12 billion in projects in southeastern Turkey. <b>15 March: </b>Chief public prosecutor prepares indictment to annul JDP and ban its leadership cadres
         from active politics on the grounds that they have a hidden agenda of bringing back
         a state based on Islam. <b>4 April: </b>Turkey and Israel sign agreement to reciprocally train fresh diplomats. <b>8 April: </b>In its 2008 report, the European Union (EU) Police Union (EUROPOL) announces the classification
         of the PKK as a terrorist organization. <b>11 April: </b>Head of the European Union Commission, Jose Manuel Barraso, says, “Turkey constitutes
         a strong alternative to political Islam.” <b>12 April:</b> Directorate of Religious Affairs affiliated to Prime Ministry says it has set aside
         funds for all categories of religious temples in the country—churches, mosques, synagogues,
         and so forth. <b>1 May: </b>May Day demonstrators clash with riot police in Istanbul’s Taksim Square. <b>2 May: </b>EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn observes that in Turkey there is a competition
         between two visions of the future, those of “secularists” and those of “democratic
         Muslims.” <b>5 May: </b>Constitutional Court annuls the constitutional amendment that allowed female students
         wearing head scarves to attend universities. <b>8 May: </b>Freedom House categorizes Turkey as a “partially free” country, while indicating that
         the country is nevertheless making further progress toward a more liberal society
         and polity. <b>13 May: </b>Britain’s Queen Elizabeth II arrives in Turkey for a three-day state visit. <b>16 May: </b>Russian Federation accuses Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Turkey, and United States
         of providing weapons to Georgia, thus destabilizing the Caucasus. Renate Sommer, member
         of the European Parliament, points out that Turkey’s accession to the EU is an open-ended
         process. <b>2 July: </b>Twenty-one high-profile journalists and political figures imprisoned under the Ergenekon
         court case that began in July 2007. Ergenekon is alleged to be a nationalist terrorist
         organization and a faction of the deep state, determined to overthrow JDP government.
         <b>9 July: </b>United States Consulate in Istanbul is attacked by three unidentified gunmen. <b>25 July: </b>Istanbul criminal court agrees to hear the case of the Ergenekon terrorist organization.
         <b>30 July: </b>Turkish Constitutional Court decides by a vote of six to five that JDP will not be
         banned for supporting an Islamic agenda but will be fined half of its annual treasury
         funding for attempting to annul head scarf ban. <b>4 October: </b>Turkish military clashes with PKK terrorists in the southeastern province of Hakkari;
         15 soldiers and 23 PKK terrorists die. <b>17 October: </b>Turkey wins balloting for a two-year stint on the UN’s Security Council. <b>20 October: </b>Trial for the so-called Ergenekon terrorist organization case begins. Eighty-six defendants,
         including prominent academics, journalists, politicians, retired officers, and union
         leaders, are accused of belonging to a clandestine ultranationalist organization that
         aims to overthrow the elected JDP government. <b>16 December:</b> Over 200 Turkish intellectuals initiate an online petition apologizing for the “great
         catastrophe” that befell Armenians in the Ottoman Empire during World War I. <b>30 December: </b>Turkish Radio and Television Agency (TRT) starts broadcasting in Kurdish.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.139"><b>2009</b>   <b>5 January: </b>Nazım Hikmet, declared persona non grata for his Marxist views, regains Turkish citizenship
         45 years after his death. <b>13 January: </b>All but one of the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party’s 21 deputies is in jeopardy
         of losing their parliamentary immunity for violating the Political Parties Law that
         bans the use of Kurdish language on election campaigns. <b>29 January: </b>Turkish court annuls prime minister’s ability to manage intelligence services’ wiretapping,
         returning the power to authorize wiretapping to Turkish courts. <b>30 January: </b>Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan marches off the stage in the Gaza Row at the World
         Economic Forum in Davos as a reaction to Israeli president Perez’s harsh speech and
         the moderator’s giving longer time to Perez. <b>5 February: </b>Kyoto Protocol, an anti–global warming measure, approved in Turkish Parliament. <b>9 February: </b>Turkey’s Supreme Election Board bans the use of charity for election campaigns. <b>19 February: </b>Turkish government fines Doğan Media Group, one of the leading media organizations
         in Turkey, 826 million TL for tax irregularities. The fine is the highest amount of
         its kind in the history of the Turkish press. <b>24 February:</b> Turkish state television cuts off its live broadcast of a parliamentary session when
         Democratic Society Party leader Ahmet Türk continues his speech in Kurdish. <b>26 February: </b>Turkish Airlines plane crashes near Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport due to a faulty radio
         altimeter. <b>27 February: </b>Türkan Saylan, the president of the Association for Supporting Contemporary Life [Çağdaş
         Yaşamı Destekleme Derneği], is awarded the Vehbi Koç Prize by the Vehbi Koç Foundation.
         Saylan decides to use the $100,000 for the education of girls. <b>13 March: </b>Turkish State Railways inaugurates Turkey’s first high-speed rail service on a 200-kilometer
         system linking the cities of Ankara and Eskişehir. <b>21 March:</b> A new Turkish television station for Turkic countries of the former Soviet Union
         launched. <b>13 April: </b>Former premier and political party leader Necmettin Erbakan, formerly ousted in a
         bloodless postmodern coup, becomes the chair of the Felicity Party. <b>30 April: </b>The JDP government announces a constitutional amendment to make it more difficult
         to shut down political parties. <b>3 May: </b>Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu emphasizes New Ottomanism. He states Turkey does not
         belong to one region; Turkey is a Balkan country, Black Sea country, Caucasian, Middle
         Eastern, Caspian and Gulf region country. Command of the counterpiracy fleet in the
         Gulf of Aden is transferred from the United States to the Turkish navy. <b>17 May: </b>Around 20,000 people gather in Ankara to protest JDP government for the investigations
         and prosecutions of the so-called Ergenekon terrorist organization and the alleged
         antisecularist nature of the party. <b>24 May: </b>Monastery of St. Gabriel in the southeastern town of Midyat (Mardin) wins the court
         case against the villagers who had claimed territory from the monastery. <b>5 June: </b>Marrying a Turkish citizen will no longer immediately enable one to obtain Turkish
         citizenship; rather, living in Turkey for a certain period of time, speaking Turkish,
         and being in good health will be the new criteria. <b>18 June: </b>An investigation starts in relation to the “Plan to Efface Justice and Development
         Party and Gülen Movement,” alleged to have been prepared by the General Staff. <b>26 June: </b>With a view to the EU standards, Parliament passes a law that brings trial of military
         personnel under civilian courts. <b>30 June: </b>İlker Başbuğ, chief of General Staff, states that the document named “Fight against
         Political Reactionism” has not been penned by the military. <b>3 July: </b>Germany signs an agreement with Turkey to build six submarines for the Turkish navy.
         <b>9 July: </b>Chief Prosecutor Sabih Kanadoğlu brings a closure case against the JDP on the grounds
         that the party had not followed court warnings. Constitutional Court rejects the case.
         <b>18 July: </b>Turkey extends smoking ban to all bars, cafes, and restaurants. <b>30 July:</b> Beşir Atalay, minister of interior affairs, states that the peace process regarding
         Kurds targets democratization and calls for the participation of intellectuals and
         the media in the process. <b>7 August: </b>Russian Federation and Turkey sign an agreement that allows construction of a Russian
         Federation gas pipeline that will pass through the Turkish portion of the Black Sea.
         <b>14 August: </b>Prime Minister Erdoğan states that they have started the democratic opening process.
         He says, “We love Kurd, Laz, and Turk for the love of Allah.” <b>17 August: </b>Devlet Bahçeli, leader of Nationalist Action Party (NAP), criticizes the democratic
         opening project by pointing out that they will not accept a divided Turkey. <b>31 August: </b>Developments in biotechnology research in Turkey are found valuable by <i>Nature Genetics</i> and <i>Biotechnology Journal</i>. <i>Biotechnology Journal</i> refers to Turkey as a developed country in genetics research. <b>13 September: </b>Fatih Akın’s movie <i>Soul Kitchen</i> is granted the Special Jury Prize at the 66th Venice Film Festival. <b>1 October: </b>First Islamic Clothes Fashion and Accessories Fair opens in Istanbul. <b>4</b>   <b>October:</b> President Gül and Haydar Aliyev, president of Azerbaijan, meet. Turkey guarantees
         that Turkey’s protocol with Armenia will not be ratified before the Nagorno-Karabakh
         issue between Armenia and Azerbaijan is settled. <b>13 October: </b>Turkey signs an agreement with Italy and Russian Federation to build Samsun–Ceyhan
         oil pipeline known as the Trans-Anatolian Pipeline. <b>16 October: </b>The president of the Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges of Turkey [Türkiye
         Odalar ve Borsalar Birliği—TOBB], Rıfat Hisarcıklıoğlu, elected as the deputy president
         of the European Association of Chambers of Commerce and Industry. <b>19 October: </b>Turkey and Qatar lift mutual visa requirements. <b>20 October: </b>Turkey signs 48 agreements with Iraq to improve relations between the two nations.
         <b>22 October: </b>Turkey’s ranking drops to 122 in 2009 Press Freedom Index. Turkish state is criticized
         for its far too frequent resort to Article 301 in the Penal Law that makes possible
         the prosecution of any statement that criticizes Turkish identity. <b>3 November: </b>Turkey and Israel conduct joint search-and-rescue exercises for the first time since
         Israel was excluded from North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) military exercises.
         <b>13 November: </b>Turkey introduces new reforms to increase the rights of its Kurdish population as
         part of the democratic opening process, such as fewer restrictions on the Kurdish
         language and the establishment of a special commission to investigate allegations
         of torture and abuse. <b>25 November: </b>Libya and Turkey sign a series of agreements to improve bilateral relations. Among
         them is one that lifts visa restrictions between the two countries. <b>6 December: </b>Prime Minister Erdoğan states that Turkey will not send additional troops to Afghanistan
         despite the fact that there is a demand from the United States. <b>8 December: </b>Prime Minister Erdoğan meets U.S. president Barack Obama at Washington. They decide
         to increase American-Turkish cooperation in various fields from science and art to
         politics and technology. <b>11 December: </b>Turkey’s Constitutional Court bans the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party with the
         reason that the party has links to the PKK terrorist organization. Prime Minister
         Erdoğan criticizes the court’s decision, stating that it contravenes government’s
         efforts to improve Kurdish rights and constitutes a setback for the efforts to improve
         Turkish-Kurdish relations.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.140"><b>2010</b>   <b>14 January: </b>Russian Federation and Turkey sign an agreement for the construction of Turkey’s first
         nuclear plant. <b>3 February:</b> European Court of Human Rights decides that expression of religion on ID cards in
         Turkey is against Article 9 of the European Convention on Human Rights. <b>16 February: </b>European Court of Human Rights rules against Turkey’s decision to ban Guillaume Apollinaire’s
         erotic novel <i>The Eleven Thousand Rods</i>. The court states that banning the book hinders public access to the European literary
         heritage and is a violation of Article 10 of the European Convention of Human Rights
         about the freedom of expression. <b>19 February: </b>Service held by the Armenian patriarchate of Istanbul at the Armenian Cathedral Church
         of the Holy Cross in Lake Van 95 years after the last one. <b>21 February: </b>The film <i>Honey </i>[Bal] by the director Semih Kaplanoğlu is awarded the Golden Bear at the 60th Berlin
         International Film Festival. <b>8 April: </b>Greece and Turkey sign a series of measures to strengthen ties between their militaries
         with the aim of overcoming their long-standing rivalry. <b>22 April: </b>Human Rights Watch issues a report on police abuse in Turkey, citing violence against
         children and excessive use of lethal force. <b>24 April: </b>For the first time in Turkey, protestors comprising different ethnic and religious
         groups openly commemorate the 95th anniversary of the 1915–1917 mass killings of Armenians.
         <b>13 May:</b> Mersin Akkuyu Nuclear Plant Agreement and the agreement for visa-free travel between
         Russian Federation and Turkey signed. <b>31 May: </b>Israel attacks in international waters the <i>Blue Marmara</i> [<i>Mavi Marmara</i>], one of the ships in the aid flotilla heading toward Gaza Strip. <b>22 June: </b>Southeast European Cooperation Process (SEECP) takes place in Istanbul. <b>28 June: </b>Following Israel’s raid on the aid flotilla in Gaza, Turkey decides to close its airspace
         to noncivilian Israeli aircraft. <b>12 July: </b>In a private meeting with U.S. secretary of state Hillary Clinton, Turkish foreign
         minister Ahmet Davutoğlu states that Turkey will not take part in international efforts
         regarding Iran’s nuclear program. <b>19 July: </b>U.S. senator John McCain says that by maintaining the secular and democratic heritage
         of Atatürk, Turkey will effectively fight against the increase of radical Islam in
         the region. <b>1 August: </b>Turkish female athlete Nevin Yanıt wins gold medal for women’s 100-meter hurdles final
         at the 20th European Athletics Championships in Barcelona. <b>12 September: </b>Turkey holds referendum for constitutional change package. The amendments are approved.
         <b>21 September: </b>The nephews of Archbishop Aram Ateşyan, general vicar of the Armenian patriarch in
         Turkey, change their identity from Muslim to Christian. <b>5 October: </b>Turkish director Fatih Akın honored with the order of merit by Christian Wolff, president
         of Germany, for his contributions in the field of culture in Germany. <b>19 October: </b>First Turkish-German University groundbreaking ceremony takes place in Istanbul. <b>28 October: </b>At the National Security Council meeting, reactionism [<i>irtica</i>] is no longer considered a domestic security issue. <b>29 November: </b>Deed of the Greek orphanage on Büyükada, the largest of Prince Islands in the Marmara
         Sea, transferred to the Orthodox patriarchate in Istanbul.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.141"><b>2011</b>   <b>22 January: </b>Ankara University Stem Cell Institute produces muscle from stem cell, the first of
         its kind in the world. <b>28 January:</b> Official ceremony organized for the first time in Neve Shalom Synagogue in Istanbul
         for victims of the Holocaust. <b>17 March: </b>Moscow State Diplomacy Institute confers on Erdoğan honorary Ph.D. degree. <b>28 March:</b> Turkish prime minister Erdoğan meets with Syrian president Bashar al-Assad, encouraging
         him to pay attention to his people’s call for reforms. <b>12 June:</b> General elections held. Ruling JDP garners 50 percent of votes and 327 seats in Parliament
         while Republican People’s Party (RPP) gets 21 percent of votes and 135 seats and Nationalist
         Action Party (NAP) gathers 14 percent of votes and 53 seats. Thirty-six pro-Kurdish
         Peace and Democracy Party (PDP) independent candidates enter Parliament. <b>17 June:</b> Hollywood star and UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) goodwill ambassador
         Angelina Jolie visits Syrian refugee camp in the city of Hatay. <b>4 August: </b>Turkey refuses to participate in joint naval exercises with the United States and
         Israel in the Mediterranean. <b>1 September:</b> Children who hold Armenian citizenship can now attend Armenian community schools
         in Turkey. <b>2 September: </b>Turkey declines its diplomatic relations and suspends military cooperation with Israel
         following Israel’s refusal to apologize for the <i>Mavi Marmara </i>incident. <b>21 October: </b>Temple in Loedikya, ancient city in Denizli, believed to be one of the seven holy
         churches, discovered.<b> 23 November: </b>Prime Minister Erdoğan makes an apology for Turkish military’s killing of more than
         13,000 Kurds in the 1930s, being the first Turkish prime minister to do so. <b>2 December:</b> Science Academy [Bilim Akademisi] formed. <b>15 December: </b>İzmir Jewish Community granted the status of foundation after more than 100 years.
         <b>22 December: </b>French National Assembly passes a bill criminalizing the denial that the mass killing
         of Armenians at the end of World War I was genocide. <b>27 December: </b>Turkey signs a $5 billion agreement with Azerbaijan on the Trans-Anatolian Natural
         Gas Pipeline. <b>28 December: </b>Turkey signs an agreement with Russian Federation regarding the South Stream natural
         gas pipeline to Europe through Turkish territorial waters.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.142"><b>2012</b>   <b>5 January: </b>Former chief of General Staff General İlker Başbuğ is arrested by a civilian court
         on charges of his relationship with so-called Ergenekon terrorist organization alleged
         to have made plans to overthrow the government by force. <b>19 January: </b>Ten thousand people march silently in Istanbul at the fifth anniversary of the murder
         of Hrant Dink, Turkish journalist of Armenian descent. <b>8 March: </b>Turkish Parliament passes a bill to prevent violence against women and to increase
         assistance for victims. <b>10 April: </b>China and Turkey sign two nuclear agreements. <b>12 April: </b>Minister of Education Ömer Dinçer announces that wearing of head scarf at secondary
         and high schools will be permitted in elective course classes. <b>20 April: </b>President of Iraqi Kurdistan region Mesud Barzani and Prime Minister Erdoğan discuss
         the issues of Iraq, Syria, and terrorism. <b>28 April: </b>First full face transplant in Turkey is performed for 19-year-old Uğur Acar. <b>5 May: </b>Law of reciprocity, which allows the selling of real estate to citizens of 62 countries,
         is adopted. <b>21 May: </b>Circassians in Turkey raise demands for education in their mother tongue and TV and
         radio broadcasting in Circassian. <b>23 June:</b> Göksu/Panayia holy spring is returned to the foundation of Kandilli Metamorphosis
         Church. <b>10 July: </b>Turkish novelist Elif Şafak is awarded Chevalier dans l’Ordre des Arts et des Lettres
         by France for her intellectual contribution to freedom of expression, intercultural
         dialogue, and human rights. <b>29 July: </b>New sculpture belonging to a Hittite king dating back to 1000 B.C.E. discovered. <b>8 August: </b>Number of Syrian refugees taking shelter in Turkey reaches almost 50,000. <b>2 October: </b>Remains of former president Turgut Özal will be exhumed due to allegations that he
         was poisoned. <b>5 October: </b>Resolution for sending troops to other countries is approved in Parliament, particularly
         for sending troops to Syria. <b>14 October: </b>First pipe of the underwater pipeline project for water transfer from Turkey to the
         Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus placed in the Mediterranean. <b>28 November: </b>Dress code for precollege schools changes: students of primary, elementary, and high
         schools will no longer be forced to wear one style of school uniforms. <b>14 December: </b>United States signs a deployment order that sends 400 U.S. troops and two batteries
         of Patriot missiles to Turkey against possible missile attacks from Syria.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.143"><b>2013</b>   <b>8 January: </b>Turkish Bank Ziraat has opened branches in Greece. <b>21 January: </b>First of six NATO Patriot missile batteries intended to protect Turkey from potential
         missile attacks from Syria arrives at İskenderun port. <b>22 February: </b>Nationwide survey demonstrates that 95 percent of participants believe that Turkish
         and Kurdish people will continue to live together in Turkey. In the same survey, 51
         percent of participants support negotiations with jailed terrorist leader Abdullah
         Öcalan, and 65 percent support the peace process. <b>1 March: </b>Turkish prime minister Erdoğan states at a UN meeting in Vienna that Zionism is a
         crime against humanity. Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu says Erdoğan’s statement
         is false. <b>19 March: </b>Attorney of the Ergenekon court case demands lifetime imprisonment for retired general
         İlker Başbuğ, who was the 26th chief of General Staff with the allegation that he
         was the leader of the Ergenekon terrorist organization. <b>21 March: </b>Newroz is celebrated peacefully in Diyarbakır with a large crowd. Terrorist leader
         Öcalan’s message delivered in Kurdish and Turkish by PDP deputies. <b>23 March: </b>Turkish prime minister Erdoğan accepts Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s
         apology for Israel’s raid on the Turkish aid flotilla on its way to Gaza in 2010.
         <b>24 March: </b>Prime Minister Erdoğan states that there will be a seven-member wise people commission,
         comprising academics and representatives from the private sector, media, and civil
         society organizations. <b>9 April: </b>Turkish Foreign Ministry announces that two new refugee camps will be set up in the
         southeastern town of Midyat (Mardin) for Assyrian Christians and Kurds from Syria.
         <b>24 May: </b>A new law bans advertising alcohol and prohibits shops from selling alcohol from 10
         p.m. to 6 a.m. <b>29 May: </b>Protestors who have been keeping watch against construction of a shopping mall in
         Gezi Park clash with police. Some deputies from PDP and Republican People’s Party
         (RPP), as well as journalists, actors, and actresses, join protestors in their wish
         to save the park. <b>2 June: </b>Gezi Park protests spread all over Turkey. <b>15 June: </b>Prime Minister Erdoğan states that the government will suspend plans for Gezi Park
         until a court decision is made. <b>3 July: </b>Constitutional Court opens the way for individual applications regarding long detention
         periods and the right to a fair trial before the trial is finalized. <b>6 August: </b>Ergenekon court case is finalized after four years and 10 months. The 21 suspects
         are acquitted, the remaining 254 being handed different prison sentences. Nine suspects,
         including retired general Veli Küçük, journalist Tuncay Özkan, president of Labor
         Party Doğu Perinçek, and retired colonel Dursun Çiçek, are given aggravated life imprisonment;
         and 10 suspects, including retired general and chief of General Staff İlker Başbuğ,
         retired general Hurşit Tolon, retired general Şener Eruygur, and press agent of Turkish
         Orthodox patriarchate Sevgi Erenerol, are given life imprisonment. <b>16 September: </b>The Greek primary school on Gökçeada (Imbros) restarts education after 49 years. <b>1 October:</b> Prime Minister Erdoğan introduces democratization package. The package includes free
         usage of letters <i>x</i>, <i>w</i>, and <i>q</i>, which are in the Kurdish alphabet, and of the pre-1980 names of villages; abandonment
         of the practice of jointly reading the national oath at primary schools every morning;
         and letting public servants, including teachers, doctors, and parliamentarians, put
         on head scarves, depending on their free will. <b>31 October:</b> Excavations on the European side of Istanbul reveal the first signs of Hittites’
         existence in the region. The ruins are estimated to be 3,800 years old. <b>1 November: </b>First parliamentarians with head scarves appear in Parliament. <b>16 December: </b>Agreements to start visa-free EU travel for Turkish citizens signed in Ankara. <b>17 December: </b>Eighty-four people are taken into custody under the operation of “Grand Bribery.”
         Allegations include the sons of minister for interior affairs Muhammer Güler, economy
         minister Zafer Çağlayan, and minister of environment Erdoğan Bayraktar. Prime Minister
         Erdoğan says that the secret organization that acts like a state within the state
         should be revealed.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.144"><b>2014</b>   <b>8 January: </b>Chief of General Staff Necdet Özel states that it is not possible anymore to have
         military tutelage. <b>1 March: </b>Prime Minister Erdoğan calls out to Fethullah Gülen, who has been living in the United
         States and demands Gülen’s return to Turkey to enter active politics instead of organizing
         opposition from the United States. He states that Gülen has been involved in activities
         against Turkey’s national security. He states that earlier Gülen was a peaceful, pious
         person, but later he was induced to capture the state from within. <b>8 March: </b>Former chief of General Staff İlker Başbuğ, earlier given a life sentence, released.
         <b>30 March: </b>Turkey holds local elections. JDP wins elections in 17 metropolitan cities including
         Ankara and Istanbul and 31 other cities. <b>23 April: </b>For the first time in the history of the Turkish Republic, the Prime Ministry makes
         an official statement about the 1915 events. Prime Minister Erdoğan states that “the
         incidents that had taken place are common pains of all of us. Sharing and understanding
         the pain of Armenians and their commemoration of memories is a duty for humanity.”
         Armenian patriarch agent-general welcomes Erdoğan’s statements and expresses that
         his words soothe Armenians’ feelings. <b>15 May: </b>Fire starts in mine in Soma (Manisa); 301 miners lose their lives. <b>1 August: </b>Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and
         Domestic Violence, commonly known as the Istanbul Convention, signed by 10 European
         states and Turkey in 2011, comes into force. <b>10 August: </b>Prime Minister Erdoğan becomes Turkey’s first popularly elected president. <b>15 August: </b>Fifth Virgin Mary rite is held under the leadership of Greek Orthodox patriarch Dimitris
         Bartholomeus in the historic Sumela Monastery on the Black Sea coast. The patriarch
         delivers a message for global peace. <b>28 August: </b>Erdoğan sworn in in front of the Turkish Parliament as Turkey’s new president for
         a five-year term. Many consider Erdoğan to be the most powerful political figure in
         Turkish politics since the first president of Turkey, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk. <b>8 September: </b>According to official data, in the last three years at least 30,000 Syrian children
         have been born in Turkey in the provinces with refugee camps. <b>22 September: </b>Deputy Prime Minister Numan Kurtulmuş announces that more than 130,000 Syrians have
         fled to Turkey in the past days. Turkey has received more than one million refugees
         since the beginning of the Syrian conflict. <b>28 September: </b>Ministry of Education forbids students having tattoos or piercings. <b>29 September: </b>Because of ISIS attacks on Kobani (Syria), more than 150,000 Syrian Kurds have fled
         into Turkey. <b>2 October: </b>Turkish Parliament passes resolution that allows military action in Syria and Iraq
         and also foreign troops to launch attacks from Turkish territory. <b>8 October: </b>At least 23 people die in the two-day-long demonstrations across Turkey as Kurdish
         protestors demand the government take action to protect Kobani from ISIS attacks.
         <b>20 October: </b>Minister of Foreign Affairs Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu announces that Turkey will allow Kurdish
         <i>peshmerga </i>to cross into Syria to help fight against ISIS attacks. Turkey’s decision is also
         welcomed by the international community. <b>1 December: </b>Papa Francesco visits Turkey. <b>3 December: </b>Turkish Parliament passes bill that tightens government’s control over the judiciary
         and gives police greater powers to conduct searches. <b>8 December: </b>President Erdoğan announces plans to introduce mandatory Ottoman Turkish lessons in
         public school curriculum. <b>29 December: </b>Turkey provides identification cards for Syrian refugees that provide access to public
         housing, education, health care, and other social programs. This constitutes an important
         move by the government, since Syrians who fled to Turkey are not given official refugee
         status.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.145"><b>2015</b>   <b>20 January: </b>President Erdoğan states that his phone was illegally wiretapped last year during
         a corruption scandal. He also accuses Fethullah Gülen, self-exiled cleric in the United
         States, of supporting the wiretappers. <b>5 February: </b>Bank Asya, which is affiliated with self-exiled cleric Gülen, is taken over by the
         government. Banking regulators state that the bank has not been transparent in its
         business. <b>21 February: </b>Turkish army conducts mission into Syria to save the Tomb of Suleiman Shah, a 13th-century
         ancestor of the Ottoman Empire. The tomb has been under ISIS siege. <b>7 June: </b>General elections are held. The ruling JDP loses its parliamentary majority for the
         first time in its history. The left-leaning pro-Kurdish Peoples’ Democratic Party
         (PDP) passes the threshold and gains seats. Since no party holds a majority to form
         the government, talks commence for possible government coalition. <b>August: </b>Far leftist terrorist group DHKP-C attacks U.S. consulate in Istanbul with gunfire.
         No one injured. <b>18 August: </b>Negotiations for coalition government fail, triggering snap polls in November. <b>2 September: </b>Image of drowned three-year-old Syrian boy Alan Kurdi on a popular tourist beach increases
         public and international attention to the humanitarian crisis of refugees who are
         attempting to cross into Europe by illegal means. <b>10 October:</b> Peace rally in Ankara attacked by two suicide bombings; 102 people lose their lives
         while more than 250 are wounded. The attack is believed to be organized by ISIS. <b>31 October: </b>Turkish military attacks ISIS targets after the chief prosecutor’s announcement that
         they have strong evidence for ISIS responsibility for Ankara suicide bombing at the
         train station. <b>1 November: </b>General elections are held since no coalition government could be formed after 7 June
         elections. JDP increases its share of votes to 49 percent, which brings it the majority
         in Parliament with 317 seats. <b>15 November: </b>Turkey hosts annual summit of Group of Twenty (G20) in Antalya. <b>17 November: </b>Turkey abandons deal with China to develop missile defense system. The prospect of
         such a deal had caused concerns in NATO. <b>24 November: </b>Turkey shoots down Russian Federation warplane that violated Turkish airspace. The
         pilot of the warplane dies. <b>27 November: </b>Thousands of people gather in Istanbul to protest the arrest of journalist Can Dündar,
         editor in chief of one of the opposition newspapers, <i>Republic </i>[Cumhuriyet], and Erdem Gül, bureau chief of the same newspaper. Journalists are charged
         with disclosing state secrets. <b>28 November: </b>Russian Federation introduces sanctions on Turkey after the downing of its warplane
         on 24 November. Sanctions include restrictions on Turkish labor, imports, and construction
         projects. Russian Federation also takes steps to reduce number of Russian Federation
         tourists visiting Turkey. <b>30 November: </b>Turkey signs agreement with European Union (EU) that grants the country $3.2 billion
         to support Syrian refugees and improve their living conditions. The agreement also
         includes political concessions for visa-free travel for Turkish citizens within the
         EU.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.146"><b>2016</b>   <b>15 January: </b>Police detain 27 academics for signing petition titled “We Will Not Be a Part of This
         Crime,” which is alleged as disseminating terrorist propaganda. The petition is also
         signed by more than 1,000 academics working at Turkish universities and abroad. The
         detained academics are released the same day. <b>17 February: </b>Kurdistan Freedom Hawks (TAK), the youth branch of the terrorist organization PKK,
         conducts a bomb attack on the bus convoy that carries military personnel in Ankara.
         The bombing kills 28 people and wounds more than 60. President Erdoğan states that
         the People’s Defense Unit (YPG) has been involved in the bombing. The United States
         has been supporting YPG in their fight against ISIS in Syria. <b>4 March: </b>Justice and Development Party (JDP) government takes control of the daily newspaper
         <i>Time </i>[Zaman], which has been one of the most circulated newspapers in Turkey. The newspaper
         was an important broadcasting organization of the Fethullah Gülen group, which has
         been critical of the government and of President Erdoğan. <b>18 March: </b>Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu and the president of the European Council, Donald Tusk,
         confirm that European Union (EU) and Turkey have agreed to return all refugees and
         migrants arriving in Greece to Turkey. In return, EU promises to revisit talks on
         Turkey’s EU membership and facilitate the expense of funds allocated to help Syrian
         refugees already in Turkey. Since the outbreak of war in Syria, more than 2.7 million
         Syrians have arrived in Turkey. <b>27 April: </b>Galatasaray basketball team wins the Eurocup. <b>20 May: </b>Turkish Parliament passes the constitutional amendment that divests deputies of their
         immunity from prosecution. The amendment particularly aims at deputies of the pro-Kurdish
         Peoples’ Democratic Party (PDP), the third-largest party in Parliament. <b>2 June: </b>The German parliament recognizes the mass killing of Armenians during the Ottoman
         Empire at the end of World War I as genocide. Turkey, objecting to the terms “genocide”
         and “ethnic cleansing,” recalls its ambassador to Berlin. <b>18 June: </b>London-based Syrian Observatory for Humans Rights (SOHR) states that border guards
         shot to death eight Syrian refugees who were trying to cross illegally into Turkey.
         <b>19 June: </b>Istanbul riot police disperse a transgender pride march on İstiklal Avenue, firing
         tear gas and rubber pellets. Homosexuality is not an official crime in Turkey, but
         its practice in public remains controversial among conservative and nationalist groups.
         <b>23 June:</b> Turkish Parliament passes a law that obstructs prosecution of soldiers for human
         rights abuses committed during counterterrorism operations. <b>26 June: </b>Prime Minister Yıldırım and Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu announce a deal
         to reconcile relations between the two countries after a six-year deadlock. They agree
         on reopening embassies and on $20 million compensation for the families of Turkish
         activists who lost their lives in the raid on the <i>Mavi Marmara</i> aid flotilla in 2010. <b>27 June: </b>President Erdoğan apologizes to Russian Federation president Vladimir Putin for downing
         of the Russian Federation jet in November 2015 near Turkish-Syrian border, killing
         the pilot of the jet. <b>1 July: </b>Osmangazi Bridge, which crosses the İzmit Bay, is opened. The bridge is the fourth-longest
         suspension bridge in the world and the second longest in Europe. <b>3 July: </b>Turkey sends 11,000 tons of humanitarian aid to Gaza Strip via the Israeli port of
         Ashdod. Israel agrees to transfer the aid over land due to its blockade of Gaza since
         2006. <b>6 July: </b>Russian Federation officially allows charter flights between Russian Federation and
         Turkey to resume. Russian Federation has also lifted travel sanctions on tours to
         Turkey. <b>7 July: </b>Fifteen-year-old Ayşe Begüm Onbaşı wins gold medal in the Aerobic Gymnastic World
         Championship. <b>15 July: </b>Factions of Turkish army controlled by Fethullah Gülen, the self-exiled cleric in
         the United States, attempt a coup against President Erdoğan and the Justice and Development
         Party government. They declare martial law via state television channel TRT and seize
         control of Istanbul Atatürk International Airport and the two Bosporus bridges. On
         the night of the attempt, they raid Parliament and the surroundings of the Presidential
         Palace in Beştepe, Ankara. President Erdoğan denounces the attempt via video footage
         streamed through a news anchor’s mobile phone during a televised broadcast. President
         Erdoğan calls on the public to take to the streets, which they readily do. Consequently,
         the coup attempt fails, leaving 265 people dead and at least 1,400 wounded. <b>21 July: </b>JDP government declares three-month-long state of emergency. <b>22 July: </b>The date 15 July is declared the Commemoration Day of Martyrs and also an official
         national holiday. <b>7 August: </b>Democracy and Martyrs rally is organized and attended by the leaders and supporters
         of three political parties—JDP, Republican People’s Party (RPP), and Nationalist Action
         Party (NAP). Five million people are claimed to have participated in the historic
         rally. <b>26 August: </b>A third bridge crossing the Bosporus is opened. Yavuz Sultan Selim’s name is given
         to the bridge despite opposition, particularly from the Alevi people. <b>8 September:</b> JDP government decides to stay on summer time all year round with the argument that
         it will bring more use of daylight. <b>3 October: </b>State of emergency is extended another three months. <b>4 November: </b>Nine MPs of PDP, including the party’s copresidents Selahattin Demirtaş and Figen
         Yüksekdağ, are arrested for their alleged links with the PKK terrorist organization.
         <b>5 December: </b>Turkey launches the Göktürk-1 satellite to provide high-definition satellite images
         for civilian and military purposes. <b>10 December: </b>Twin bomb attacks on police officers take place outside Beşiktaş football stadium
         in Istanbul at the end of a game. Thirty-eight police officers and eight civilians
         lose their lives. <b>18 December: </b>World-renowned Turkish pianist Fazıl Say is awarded the International Beethoven Prize.
         <b>19 December: </b>Russian Federation’s ambassador to Turkey, Andrey Karlov, is shot dead by a Turkish
         police officer in civilian clothes in an art gallery in Ankara.
      </p>
      
      <p class="chrono" id="imark_B08.147"><b>2017</b>   <b>1 January: </b>ISIS attacks Reina nightclub in Istanbul on New Year’s Eve; 39 people die and 71 are
         wounded. <b>4 January: </b>State of emergency is extended another three months. <b>8 January: </b>Foreign Affairs Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu states that 350 diplomats and 58 civil servants
         in the ministry were dismissed from their posts for their alleged ties with FETÖ.
         <b>12 January: </b>UN secretary-general Antonio Guterres says talks in Geneva to resolve Cyprus issue
         are close to a settlement. <b>26 January: </b>Greece refuses to return to Turkey the eight soldiers allegedly affiliated with FETÖ.
         <b>28 January:</b> British prime minister Theresa May visits Turkey to meet President Erdoğan. May says
         Turkey is an important NATO ally and it is important that the country sustains democracy
         by maintaining rule of law and respect for human rights. <b>2 February: </b>German prime minister Angela Merkel visits Turkey to meet President Erdoğan. The two
         leaders discuss the issues of terrorism, refugees, and economic cooperation. <b>4 February: </b>One hundred pilots of Turkish armed forces are arrested for alleged involvement with
         the terrorist organization FETÖ; 180 pilots are released for being informants. <b>5 February: </b>Turkish police arrest 690 suspects in operations for allegedly having ties with ISIS.
         <b>7 February: </b>On the same grounds, 4,464 civil servants are dismissed from their posts in public
         service with Legislative Decree 686. <b>9 February: </b>U.S. CIA chief Mike Pompeo pays his first foreign visit to Turkey to meet officials
         and President Erdoğan regarding the issues of Syria, ISIS, and FETÖ. <b>28 February: </b>Turkey sets up a military base near the strategic Akil Hill in the Syrian city of
         Al-Bab. <b>2 March: </b>Germany cancels the speech of Turkish minister of justice Bekir Bozdağ that would
         have been delivered at the meeting of the Union of European Turkish Democrats. <b>4 March: </b>State prosecutor demands 2,988 life sentences for 38 military personnel suspected
         of taking part in the failed coup attempt on 15 July. <b>8 March: </b>Foreign Affairs Minister Çavuşoğlu’s speech in Hamburg is canceled by Germany for
         “security reasons.” <b>10 March </b>President Erdoğan pays a visit to Moscow to meet Russian Federation’s President Vladimir
         Putin. The two leaders discuss bilateral relations between Russian Federation and
         Turkey as well as developments in Syria. <b>11 March: </b>Family and Social Policies Minister Fatma Betül Sayan Kaya is barred in the Netherlands
         from entering the consulate as part of referendum campaign. The Netherlands also bars
         Turkish foreign minister Çavuşoğlu from flying to the country. Clashes occur between
         Turkish protestors and Dutch police. <b>16 March: </b>Turkish and South Korean firms sign deal for building the world’s longest suspension
         bridge over the Dardanelles. The bridge is planned to be 1.2 miles long and will cost
         around $2.8 billion. <b>26 March: </b>President Erdoğan remarks that Turkey may hold a referendum on the continuation of
         the European Union (EU) negotiations process. <b>8 April: </b>Turkey declares its support for U.S. missile strike against Syrian air base in response
         to Assad’s chemical attack in Syria. <b>12 April: </b>Public prosecutor demands life imprisonment for 30 journalists of Istanbul daily <i>Time </i>[Zaman] for allegedly being close to FETÖ terrorist organization. Last Ergenekon trial,
         the OdaTV trial, ends with acquittal of all 13 defendants. <b>16 April: </b>Turkey votes in constitutional referendum. Constitutional amendments are approved
         with 51.4 percent yes votes; parliamentary democracy replaced by “presidential government
         system.” <b>17 April: </b>State of emergency is extended another three months. <b>19 April: </b>Supreme Electoral Council refuses applications of RPP, PDP, and Homeland Party for
         cancellation of the referendum. <b>25 April: </b>Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) votes to reintroduce a monitoring
         process for Turkey because the constitutional amendments approved in the 16 April
         referendum do not comply with Europe’s fundamental understanding of democracy. <b>1 May: </b>The number of academics expelled from universities under the state of emergency regime
         reaches 5,295. <b>4 May: </b>Trials of 12 September military coup conclude without any punishment due to the deaths
         of the last two suspected generals, Kenan Evren and Tahsin Şahinkaya. Iran, Russian
         Federation, and Turkey sign a memorandum to establish four de-escalation zones in
         Syria. <b>9 May: </b>President Erdoğan states that Turkey’s willingness to sustain EU membership process
         on equal, win-win basis continues. <b>16 May: </b>President Erdoğan visits White House to meet American president Donald Trump. Trump
         declares America’s support for Turkey’s fight against terrorist organizations and
         willingness to cooperate with Turkey for the establishment of peace and security in
         the Middle East. <b>21 May: </b>President Erdoğan once again leader of the ruling Justice and Development Party. <b>22 May: </b>Trial of generals of failed coup attempt starts in Ankara. Prosecutors demand life
         sentences for each of the 2,988 suspects. <b>June: </b>Son-in-law of Bülent Arınç, one of the founders of JDP, is arrested on charges of
         being a member of the FETÖ terrorist organization. <b>6 June: </b>Turkey does not support the sanctions against Qatar imposed by Saudi Arabia, Bahrain,
         Egypt, and the United Arab Emirates. <b>8 June: </b>Turkish Parliament approves agreements with Qatar for military cooperation. <b>12 June: </b>Turkish economy grows 5 percent in the first quarter of 2017. <b>14 June: </b>Journalist and RPP MP Enis Berberoğlu arrested in relation with the MİT truck case
         and sentenced to 25 years. RPP leader Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu will start a “Justice March”
         from Ankara to Istanbul. <b>15 June: </b>Kılıçdaroğlu’s Justice March begins. Thousands give their support by accompanying
         him. <b>18 June:</b> The first group of Turkish soldiers arrives in Qatar to take part in joint military
         exercises. <b>19 June: </b>President Erdoğan criticizes Justice March of Kılıçdaroğlu by saying that rule of
         law should be respected.
      </p>
      
      
   </body>
</html>